All of you, my fellow Israelites, are to know for sure that it is through Jesus that the message about forgiveness of sins is preached to you; you are to know that everyone who believes in him is set free from all the sins from which the Law of Moses could not set you free.
But it is easier for heaven and earth to disappear than for the smallest detail of the Law to be done away with.
Anyone who comes to me and listens to my words and obeys them -- I will show you what he is like.
that is, not your own conscience, but the other person's conscience. Well, then, someone asks, why should my freedom to act be limited by another person's conscience?
You are the ones who received God's law, that was handed down by angels -- yet you have not obeyed it!
The servant does not deserve thanks for obeying orders, does he?
Then Paul called one of the officers and said to him, Take this young man to the commander; he has something to tell him.
Then Pilate took Jesus and had him whipped.
No one can please God without faith, for whoever comes to God must have faith that God exists and rewards those who seek him.
Do for others what you want them to do for you: this is the meaning of the Law of Moses and of the teachings of the prophets.
which you have prepared in the presence of all peoples:
In his disciples' presence Jesus performed many other miracles which are not written down in this book.
But Stephen, full of the Holy Spirit, looked up to heaven and saw God's glory and Jesus standing at the right side of God.
Jesus left the synagogue and went to Simon's home. Simon's mother-in-law was sick with a high fever, and they spoke to Jesus about her.
Then the father went to the other son and said the same thing. Yes, sir, he answered, but he did not go.
Whoever breaks one commandment is guilty of breaking them all.
So he sent Timothy and Erastus, two of his helpers, to Macedonia, while he spent more time in the province of Asia.
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever.
A large number of people heard that Jesus was in Bethany, so they went there, not only because of Jesus but also to see Lazarus, whom Jesus had raised from death.
Here is the secret meaning of the seven stars that you see in my right hand, and of the seven gold lampstands: the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.
but they held him back, saying, Stay with us; the day is almost over and it is getting dark. So he went in to stay with them.
Then the Devil, who deceived them, was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet had already been thrown; and they will be tormented day and night forever and ever.
The next day the Jewish leaders, the elders, and the teachers of the Law gathered in Jerusalem.
Submit yourselves to one another because of your reverence for Christ.
The voice said to the sixth angel, Release the four angels who are bound at the great Euphrates River!
Jesus then sent him home with the order, Don't go back into the village.
May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.
As the men were leaving, some people brought to Jesus a man who could not talk because he had a demon.
For through him God created everything in heaven and on earth, the seen and the unseen things, including spiritual powers, lords, rulers, and authorities. God created the whole universe through him and for him.
You will fold them up like a coat, and they will be changed like clothes. But you are always the same, and your life never ends.
The rain poured down, the rivers flooded over, the wind blew hard against that house, and it fell. And what a terrible fall that was!
The king went in to look at the guests and saw a man who was not wearing wedding clothes.
Then Jesus ordered the people not to speak of it to anyone; but the more he ordered them not to, the more they told it.
On the following day we left and arrived in Caesarea. There we stayed at the house of Philip the evangelist, one of the seven men who had been chosen as helpers in Jerusalem.
Simon Peter motioned to him and said, Ask him whom he is talking about.
One of those who were with Jesus drew his sword and struck at the High Priest's slave, cutting off his ear.
But what if my untruth serves God's glory by making his truth stand out more clearly? Why should I still be condemned as a sinner?
and will throw them into the fiery furnace, where they will cry and gnash their teeth.
And because of the proof which this service of yours brings, many will give glory to God for your loyalty to the gospel of Christ, which you profess, and for your generosity in sharing with them and everyone else.
And Jesus continued, You have a clever way of rejecting God's law in order to uphold your own teaching.
So the master said to the servant, Go out to the country roads and lanes and make people come in, so that my house will be full.
They stood there puzzled about this, when suddenly two men in bright shining clothes stood by them.
Christ's message in all its richness must live in your hearts. Teach and instruct one another with all wisdom. Sing psalms, hymns, and sacred songs; sing to God with thanksgiving in your hearts.
Above all, my friends, do not use an oath when you make a promise. Do not swear by heaven or by earth or by anything else. Say only Yes when you mean yes, and No when you mean no, and then you will not come under God's judgment.
It is no use for them to worship me, because they teach human rules as though they were my laws!
Those who obey their human nature cannot please God.
He answered, The man who made me well told me to pick up my mat and walk.
That is why I wrote that letter to you -- I did not want to come to you and be made sad by the very people who should make me glad. For I am convinced that when I am happy, then all of you are happy too.
When God made his solemn promise, They will never enter the land where I would have given them rest -- of whom was he speaking? Of those who rebelled.
David called him Lord'; how, then, can the Messiah be David's descendant?
He answered them, Why did you have to look for me? Didn't you know that I had to be in my Father's house?
Seven brothers, who were the sons of a Jewish High Priest named Sceva, were doing this.
It was faith that made Abraham offer his son Isaac as a sacrifice when God put Abraham to the test. Abraham was the one to whom God had made the promise, yet he was ready to offer his only son as a sacrifice.
But if in your heart you are jealous, bitter, and selfish, don't sin against the truth by boasting of your wisdom.
so they went in; but they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
So the churches were made stronger in the faith and grew in numbers every day.
It may be that Onesimus was away from you for a short time so that you might have him back for all time.
I tell you that from now on I will not drink this wine until the Kingdom of God comes.
Then I heard a voice from heaven saying, Write this: Happy are those who from now on die in the service of the Lord! Yes indeed! answers the Spirit. They will enjoy rest from their hard work, because the results of their service go with them.
Now I did not mean pagans who are immoral or greedy or are thieves, or who worship idols. To avoid them you would have to get out of the world completely.
God gave the Law through Moses, but grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
For the trouble at that time will be far more terrible than any there has ever been, from the beginning of the world to this very day. Nor will there ever be anything like it again.
The Father loves his Son and has put everything in his power.
I am the living one! I was dead, but now I am alive forever and ever. I have authority over death and the world of the dead.
So let us not become tired of doing good; for if we do not give up, the time will come when we will reap the harvest.
But when a stronger man attacks him and defeats him, he carries away all the weapons the owner was depending on and divides up what he stole.
Surely you know that you are God's temple and that God's Spirit lives in you!
But if by continuing to live I can do more worthwhile work, then I am not sure which I should choose.
And so the Lord knows how to rescue godly people from their trials and how to keep the wicked under punishment for the Day of Judgment,
Slaves are to submit themselves to their masters and please them in all things. They must not talk back to them
Greetings to Apelles, whose loyalty to Christ has been proved. Greetings to those who belong to the family of Aristobulus.
Paul answered, I am not mad, Your Excellency! I am speaking the sober truth.
We know that the Law is good if it is used as it should be used.
So they asked him, What can we do in order to do what God wants us to do?
Where there is jealousy and selfishness, there is also disorder and every kind of evil.
What I mean is that God made a covenant with Abraham and promised to keep it. The Law, which was given four hundred and thirty years later, cannot break that covenant and cancel God's promise.
Amazed and confused, they kept asking each other, What does this mean?
He was faithful to God, who chose him to do this work, just as Moses was faithful in his work in God's house.
Tell us, they asked Jesus, are you the one John said was going to come, or should we expect someone else?
Run your best in the race of faith, and win eternal life for yourself; for it was to this life that God called you when you firmly professed your faith before many witnesses.
[Last of all, Jesus appeared to the eleven disciples as they were eating. He scolded them, because they did not have faith and because they were too stubborn to believe those who had seen him alive.]
Be persistent in prayer, and keep alert as you pray, giving thanks to God.
We write this in order that our joy may be complete.
Jesus answered, The knowledge about the secrets of the Kingdom of heaven has been given to you, but not to them.
For Adam was created first, and then Eve.
They know God, but they do not give him the honor that belongs to him, nor do they thank him. Instead, their thoughts have become complete nonsense, and their empty minds are filled with darkness.
even though in the past I spoke evil of him and persecuted and insulted him. But God was merciful to me because I did not yet have faith and so did not know what I was doing.
Jesus stood up and commanded the wind, Be quiet! and he said to the waves, Be still! The wind died down, and there was a great calm.
If I send them home without feeding them, they will faint as they go, because some of them have come a long way.
I am telling you the truth: we speak of what we know and report what we have seen, yet none of you is willing to accept our message.
It so happened that a priest was going down that road; but when he saw the man, he walked on by on the other side.
Someone will say, Paul's letters are severe and strong, but when he is with us in person, he is weak, and his words are nothing!
and to enable even the Gentiles to praise God for his mercy. As the scripture says, And so I will praise you among the Gentiles; I will sing praises to you.
the son of Amminadab, the son of Admin, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah, 
But I know that even now God will give you whatever you ask him for.
And so God has given those people over to do the filthy things their hearts desire, and they do shameful things with each other.
The reason I use parables in talking to them is that they look, but do not see, and they listen, but do not hear or understand.
a third of the living creatures in the sea died, and a third of the ships were destroyed.
It is not the spiritual that comes first, but the physical, and then the spiritual.
Then the spirits brought the kings together in the place that in Hebrew is called Armageddon.
and then the third. The same thing happened to all seven -- they died without having children.
God announced long ago through all the prophets that his Messiah had to suffer; and he made it come true in this way.
As for you, even the hairs of your head have all been counted.
And Jesus concluded, In your opinion, which one of these three acted like a neighbor toward the man attacked by the robbers? 
Whoever does what my Father in heaven wants is my brother, my sister, and my mother.
The beast was taken prisoner, together with the false prophet who had performed miracles in his presence. (It was by those miracles that he had deceived those who had the mark of the beast and those who had worshiped the image of the beast.) The beast and the false prophet were both thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur.
When the people in the synagogue heard this, they were filled with anger.
When Pilate heard these words, he took Jesus outside and sat down on the judge's seat in the place called The Stone Pavement. (In Hebrew the name is Gabbatha.)
The two men took Jesus' body and wrapped it in linen cloths with the spices according to the Jewish custom of preparing a body for burial.
When the people heard this, they were deeply troubled and said to Peter and the other apostles, What shall we do, brothers?
That evening his disciples came to him and said, It is already very late, and this is a lonely place. Send the people  away and let them go to the villages to buy food for themselves.
This is now the third time that I am coming to visit you. Any accusation must be upheld by the evidence of two or more witnesses -- as the scripture says.
But Jesus turned around, looked at his disciples, and rebuked Peter. Get away from me, Satan, he said. Your thoughts don't come from God but from human nature!
Our people must learn to spend their time doing good, in order to provide for real needs; they should not live useless lives.
God's Spirit joins himself to our spirits to declare that we are God's children.
but they could not find any, even though many people came forward and  told lies about him. Finally two men stepped up
It is well known that he was born a member of the tribe of Judah; and Moses did not mention this tribe when he spoke of priests.
The disciples were shocked at these words, but Jesus went on to say, My children, how hard it is to enter the Kingdom of God!
In union with Christ Jesus, then, I can be proud of my service for God.
He must hold firmly to the message which can be trusted and which agrees with the doctrine. In this way he will be able to encourage others with the true teaching and also to show the error of those who are opposed to it.
When you find it, you are so happy that you put it on your shoulders
You heard his blasphemy. What is your decision? They all voted against him: he was guilty and should be put to death.
So then, submit yourselves to God. Resist the Devil, and he will run away from you.
Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, and with all your strength.
We may say that because of the far brighter glory now the glory that was so bright in the past is gone.
I give thanks to Christ Jesus our Lord, who has given me strength for my work. I thank him for considering me worthy and appointing me to serve him,
for anything that is clearly revealed becomes light. That is why it is said, Wake up, sleeper, and rise from death, and Christ will shine on you.
Do everything without complaining or arguing,
But if they have doubts about what they eat, God condemns them when they eat it, because their action is not based on faith. And anything that is not based on faith is sin.
The people who live in darkness will see a great light. On those who live in the dark land of death the light will shine.
In this way what the prophet Jeremiah had said came true:
Mary stayed about three months with Elizabeth and then went back home.
While the people were listening to this, Jesus continued and told them a parable. He was now almost at Jerusalem, and they supposed that the Kingdom of God was just about to appear.
I speak to you as sensible people; judge for yourselves what I say.
The number of men who ate was about five thousand, not counting the women and children.
For this is the commandment that the Lord has given us: I have made you a light for the Gentiles, so that all the world may be saved.
Jesus came back to the Temple; and as he taught, the chief priests and the elders came to him and asked, What right do you have to do these things? Who gave you such right?
From Paul, who by God's will is an apostle of Christ Jesus, and from our brother Timothy --
John the Baptist came, and he fasted and drank no wine, and you said, He has a demon in him!
And pray also for me, that God will give me a message when I am ready to speak, so that I may speak boldly and make known the gospel's secret.
Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven, holding in his hand the key of the abyss and a heavy chain.
What did you gain from doing the things that you are now ashamed of? The result of those things is death!
And so we shall all come together to that oneness in our faith and in our knowledge of the Son of God; we shall become mature people, reaching to the very height of Christ's full stature.
When the other ten disciples heard about it, they became angry with James and John.
Jesus answered them, The men and women of this age marry,
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus -- blessed be his name forever! -- knows that I am not lying.
And as for us -- why would we run the risk of danger every hour?
I tell you, then, that you will be able to enter the Kingdom of heaven only if you are more faithful than the teachers of the Law and the Pharisees in doing what God requires.
and so he is pulled in two directions. An unmarried woman or a virgin concerns herself with the Lord's work, because she wants to be dedicated both in body and spirit; but a married woman concerns herself with worldly matters, because she wants to please her husband.
Then Jesus went home. Again such a large crowd gathered that Jesus and his disciples had no time to eat.
None of them will have to teach their friends or tell their neighbors, Know the Lord. For they will all know me, from the least to the greatest.
But one of them, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, who was a teacher of the Law and was highly respected by all the people, stood up in the Council. He ordered the apostles to be taken out for a while,
He had been instructed in the Way of the Lord, and with great enthusiasm he proclaimed and taught correctly the facts about Jesus. However, he knew only the baptism of John.
Jesus meant that Lazarus had died, but they thought he meant natural sleep.
Let us give thanks to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the merciful Father, the God from whom all help comes!
When you pray, do not use a lot of meaningless words, as the pagans do, who think that their gods will hear them because their prayers are long.
Never again will the light of a lamp be seen in you; no more will the voices of brides and grooms be heard in you. Your merchants were the most powerful in all the world, and with your false magic you deceived all the peoples of the world!
But continue to grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be the glory, now and forever! Amen.
You must do this, because you know that the time has come for you to wake up from your sleep. For the moment when we will be saved is closer now than it was when we first believed.
Yes, even on my servants, both men and women, I will pour out my Spirit in those days, and they will proclaim my message.
Claudius Lysias to His Excellency, Governor Felix: Greetings.
All they asked was that we should remember the needy in their group, which is the very thing I have been eager to do.
But I am telling you the truth: it is better for you that I go away, because if I do not go, the Helper will not come to you. But if I do go away, then I will send him to you.
Pilate questioned him, Are you the king of the Jews? Jesus answered, So you say.
Jesus said to him, Get up, pick up your mat, and walk.
Jesus answered, Who is my mother? Who are my brothers?
They still could not believe, they were so full of joy and wonder; so he asked them, Do you have anything here to eat?
Do not believe me, then, if I am not doing the things my Father wants me to do.
We are ruled by the love of Christ, now that we recognize that one man died for everyone, which means that they all share in his death.
Every tree is known by the fruit it bears; you do not pick figs from thorn  bushes or gather grapes from bramble bushes.
Then Barnabas came to his help and took him to the apostles. He explained to them how Saul had seen the Lord on the road and that the Lord had spoken to him. He also told them how boldly Saul had preached in the name of Jesus in Damascus.
For as soon as I heard your greeting, the baby within me jumped with gladness.
The star opened the abyss, and smoke poured out of it, like the smoke from a large furnace; the sunlight and the air were darkened by the smoke from the abyss.
You Gentiles are like the branch of a wild olive tree that is broken off and then, contrary to nature, is joined to a cultivated olive tree. The Jews are like this cultivated tree; and it will be much easier for God to join these broken-off branches to their own tree again.
His son by the slave woman was born in the usual way, but his son by the free woman was born as a result of God's promise.
So he called one of the servants and asked him, What's going on?
There the officer found a ship from Alexandria that was going to sail for Italy, so he put us aboard.
Of course what I am saying now is not what the Lord would have me say; in this matter of boasting I am really talking like a fool.
It had a great, high wall with twelve gates and with twelve angels in charge of the gates. On the gates were written the names of the twelve tribes of the people of Israel.
But John tried to make him change his mind. I ought to be baptized by you, John said, and yet you have come to me!
They came to Jericho, and as Jesus was leaving with his disciples and a large crowd, a blind beggar named Bartimaeus son of Timaeus was sitting by the road.
The violent storm continued, so on the next day they began to throw some of the ship's cargo overboard,
so that others cannot know that you are fasting -- only your Father, who is unseen, will know. And your Father, who sees what you do in private, will reward you.
The demons begged Jesus not to send them into the abyss.
as he said to them, This passage of scripture has come true today, as you heard it being read.
I send greetings to Priscilla and Aquila, my fellow workers in the service of Christ Jesus;
I know where you live, there where Satan has his throne. You are true to me, and you did not abandon your faith in me even during the time when Antipas, my faithful witness, was killed there where Satan lives.
Perhaps I can make the people of my own race jealous, and so be able to save some of them.
The ten horns you saw and the beast will hate the prostitute; they will take away everything she has and leave her naked; they will eat her flesh and destroy her with fire.
May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.
Then tell us who you are, they said. We have to take an answer back to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?
Yes, my children, remain in union with him, so that when he appears we may be full of courage and need not hide in shame from him on the Day he comes.
So Ananias went, entered the house where Saul was, and placed his hands on him. Brother Saul, he said, the Lord has sent me -- Jesus himself, who appeared to you on the road as you were coming here. He sent me so that you might see again and be filled with the Holy Spirit.
It was allowed to fight against God's people and to defeat them, and it was given authority over every tribe, nation, language, and race.
but the worries about this life, the love for riches, and all other kinds of desires crowd in and choke the message, and they don't bear fruit.
So I make a request to you on behalf of Onesimus, who is my own son in Christ; for while in prison I have become his spiritual father.
At that time the Kingdom of heaven will be like this. Once there was a man who was about to leave home on a trip; he called his servants and put them in charge of his property.
My ambition has always been to proclaim the Good News in places where Christ has not been heard of, so as not to build on a foundation laid by someone else.
When the disciples heard this, they were completely amazed. Who, then, can be saved? they asked.
Instruct the older men to be sober, sensible, and self-controlled; to be sound in their faith, love, and endurance.
[The teachers of the Law and the Pharisees brought in a woman who had been caught committing adultery, and they made her stand before them all.]
It was faith that kept Enoch from dying. Instead, he was taken up to God, and nobody could find him, because God had taken him up. The scripture says that before Enoch was taken up, he had pleased God.
Nor does anyone pour new wine into used wineskins, because the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the skins will be ruined. Instead, new wine must be poured into fresh wineskins.
They shouted in a loud voice, Almighty Lord, holy and true! How long will it be until you judge the people on earth and punish them for killing us?
I want you to remember, my friends, what happened to our ancestors who followed Moses. They were all under the protection of the cloud, and all passed safely through the Red Sea.
That is why I run straight for the finish line; that is why I am like a boxer who does not waste his punches.
People's hopes began to rise, and they began to wonder whether John perhaps might be the Messiah.
And he kept begging Jesus not to send the evil spirits out of that region.
For this very reason do your best to add goodness to your faith; to your goodness add knowledge;
Is it easier to say, Your sins are forgiven you, or to say, Get up and walk?
Then they made signs to his father, asking him what name he would like the boy to have.
They came to Bethsaida, where some people brought a blind man to Jesus and begged him to touch him.
The chief priests and the whole Council tried to find some false evidence against Jesus to put him to death;
the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,
What I write is true. God knows that I am not lying!
Jesus answered, Have you never read what David did that time when he needed something to eat? He and his men were hungry,
If I have broken the law and done something for which I deserve the death penalty, I do not ask to escape it. But if there is no truth in the charges they bring against me, no one can hand me over to them. I appeal to the Emperor.
As for us, we have this large crowd of witnesses around us. So then, let us rid ourselves of everything that gets in the way, and of the sin which holds on to us so tightly, and let us run with determination the race that lies before us.
So the twelve apostles called the whole group of believers together and said, It is not right for us to neglect the preaching of God's word in order to handle finances.
When the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy; they disputed what Paul was saying and insulted him.
The time will come when your enemies will surround you with barricades, blockade you, and close in on you from every side.
For those who are being lost, it is a deadly stench that kills; but for those who are being saved, it is a fragrance that brings life. Who, then, is capable for such a task?
Instead of this, of his own free will he gave up all he had, and took the nature of a servant. He became like a human being and appeared in human likeness.
So the people sat down in rows, in groups of a hundred and groups of fifty.
A large crowd of people spread their cloaks on the road while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road.
To Jews and Gentiles alike I gave solemn warning that they should turn from their sins to God and believe in our Lord Jesus.
Come and see the man who told me everything I have ever done. Could he be the Messiah?
But they left and spread the news about Jesus all over that part of the country.
For some have claimed to possess it, and as a result they have lost the way of faith. God's grace be with you all.
That is why that field is called Field of Blood to this very day.
God has appointed me as an apostle and teacher to proclaim the Good News,
The angel also measured the wall, and it was  feet high, according to the standard unit of measure which he was using.
I do not know if he is a sinner or not, the man replied. One thing I do know: I was blind, and now I see.
And even though I am far away from you in body, still I am there with you in spirit; and as though I were there with you, I have in the name of our Lord Jesus already passed judgment on the man who has done this terrible thing. As you meet together, and I meet with you in my spirit, by the power of our Lord Jesus present with us,
But if you do not forgive others, then your Father will not forgive the wrongs you have done.
He promised through his holy prophets long ago
What I am telling you in the dark you must repeat in broad daylight, and what you have heard in private you must announce from the housetops.
I give them eternal life, and they shall never die. No one can snatch them away from me.
and it was also by water, the water of the flood, that the old world was destroyed.
They also had a few small fish. Jesus gave thanks for these and told the disciples to distribute them too.
I trust you will know that we are not failures.
You will always have poor people with you, but you will not always have me.
Paul and Barnabas got into a fierce argument with them about this, so it was decided that Paul and Barnabas and some of the others in Antioch should go to Jerusalem and see the apostles and elders about this matter.
All the islands disappeared, all the mountains vanished.
Some wanted to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him.
Do not be fooled. Bad companions ruin good character.
Greetings also to the church that meets in their house. Greetings to my dear friend Epaenetus, who was the first in the province of Asia to believe in Christ.
You know that while you were still heathen, you were led astray in many ways to the worship of lifeless idols.
Your father Abraham rejoiced that he was to see the time of my coming; he saw it and was glad.
The world cannot hate you, but it hates me, because I keep telling it that its ways are bad.
They were told not to harm the grass or the trees or any other plant; they could harm only the people who did not have the mark of God's seal on their foreheads.
For my sake you will be brought to trial before rulers and kings, to tell the Good News to them and to the Gentiles.
Be tolerant with one another and forgive one another whenever any of you has a complaint against someone else. You must forgive one another just as the Lord has forgiven you.
And I was told that the number of those who were marked with God's seal on their foreheads was ,. They were from the twelve tribes of Israel,
After this I looked, and there was an enormous crowd -- no one could count all the people! They were from every race, tribe, nation, and language, and they stood in front of the throne and of the Lamb, dressed in white robes and holding palm branches in their hands.
Paul said, The baptism of John was for those who turned from their sins; and he told the people of Israel to believe in the one who was coming after him -- that is, in Jesus.
When they joined the rest of the disciples, they saw a large crowd around them and some teachers of the Law arguing with them.
On the third day they found him in the Temple, sitting with the Jewish teachers, listening to them and asking questions. 
and he chose twelve, whom he named apostles. I have chosen you to be with me, he told them. I will also send you out to preach,
Then they saw what looked like tongues of fire which spread out and touched each person there.
When I was a child, my speech, feelings, and thinking were all those of a child; now that I am an adult, I have no more use for childish ways.
When Jesus got out of the boat, he saw this large crowd, and his heart was filled with pity for them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. So he began to teach them many things.
From Paul, who by God's will is an apostle of Christ Jesus -- To God's people in Ephesus, who are faithful in their life in union with Christ Jesus:
In our union with Christ Jesus he raised us up with him to rule with him in the heavenly world.
Instead, store up riches for yourselves in heaven, where moths and rust cannot destroy, and robbers cannot break in and steal.
Jesus answered, How unbelieving and wrong you people are! How long must I stay with you? How long do I have to put up with you? Then he said to the man, Bring your son here.
The people who heard him asked, Who, then, can be saved?
Now, however, that truth has been brought out into the open through the writings of the prophets; and by the command of the eternal God it is made known to all nations, so that all may believe and obey.
No pupils are greater than their teacher; but all pupils, when they have completed their training, will be like their teacher.
All those who knew Jesus personally, including the women who had followed him from Galilee, stood at a distance to watch.
Respect everyone, love other believers, honor God, and respect the Emperor.
After saying good-bye to the people, he went away to a hill to pray.
But some of them said, He gave sight to the blind man, didn't he? Could he not have kept Lazarus from dying?
John's clothes were made of camel's hair; he wore a leather belt around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey.
For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner without clearly indicating the charges against him.
For Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who was preached among you by Silas, Timothy, and myself, is not one who is Yes and No. On the contrary, he is God's Yes;
This was how the birth of Jesus Christ took place. His mother Mary was engaged to Joseph, but before they were married, she found out that she was going to have a baby by the Holy Spirit.
But now, by means of the physical death of his Son, God has made you his friends, in order to bring you, holy, pure, and faultless, into his presence.
Make sure that your endurance carries you all the way without failing, so that you may be perfect and complete, lacking nothing.
to God be the glory in the church and in Christ Jesus for all time, forever and ever! Amen.
In the same way, the Lord has ordered that those who preach the gospel should get their living from it.
They were pleased to hear what he had to say, and promised to give him money. So Judas started looking for a good chance to hand Jesus over to them.
If he were on earth, he would not be a priest at all, since there are priests who offer the gifts required by the Jewish Law.
God is Spirit, and only by the power of his Spirit can people worship him as he really is.
Moses wrote this about being put right with God by obeying the Law: Whoever obeys the commands of the Law will live.
She will be happier, however, if she stays as she is. That is my opinion, and I think that I too have God's Spirit.
Jesus answered, Stop grumbling among yourselves.
Listen, then, if you have ears!
What I mean, my friends, is this: there is not much time left, and from now on married people should live as though they were not married;
And David says, May they be caught and trapped at their feasts; may they fall, may they be punished!
The whole human race will see God's salvation!
For as woman was made from man, in the same way man is born of woman; and it is God who brings everything into existence.
This happened three times, and then the thing was taken back up into heaven.
If you have ears, then, listen to what the Spirit says to the churches! To those who win the victory I will give the right to eat the fruit of the tree of life that grows in the Garden of God.
The tenants grabbed the slave, beat him, and sent him back without a thing.
At this the High Priest tore his clothes and said, Blasphemy! We don't need any more witnesses! You have just heard his blasphemy!
Some Greeks were among those who had gone to Jerusalem to worship during the festival.
their secret thoughts will be brought into the open, and they will bow down and worship God, confessing, Truly God is here among you!
Watch, then, and remember that with many tears, day and night, I taught every one of you for three years.
Teacher, the man said, ever since I was young, I have obeyed all these commandments.
Where do you want us to get it ready? they asked him.
And so Saul stayed with them and went all over Jerusalem, preaching boldly in the name of the Lord.
You boast about having God's law -- but do you bring shame on God by breaking his law?
But you, friends, are not in the darkness, and the Day should not take you by surprise like a thief.
For the others put in what they had to spare of their riches; but she, poor as she is, put in all she had -- she gave all she had to live on.
Well, what then? I tell you that even if he will not get up and give you the bread because you are his friend, yet he will get up and give you everything you need because you are not ashamed to keep on asking.
The governor then motioned to Paul to speak, and Paul said, I know that you have been a judge over this nation for many years, and so I am happy to defend myself before you.
Do not judge others, so that God will not judge you,
She went home and found her child lying on the bed; the demon had indeed gone out of her.
Those who speak on their own authority are trying to gain glory for themselves. But he who wants glory for the one who sent him is honest, and there is nothing false in him.
returned from the tomb, and told all these things to the eleven disciples and all the rest.
Now then, you and the Council send word to the Roman commander to bring Paul down to you, pretending that you want to get more accurate information about him. But we will be ready to kill him before he ever gets here.
They went to Philip (he was from Bethsaida in Galilee) and said, Sir, we want to see Jesus.
the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,
When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they started shouting in their own Lycaonian language, The gods have become like men and have come down to us!
(This was before John had been put in prison.)
All this is for your sake; and as God's grace reaches more and more people, they will offer to the glory of God more prayers of thanksgiving.
(The one who saw this happen has spoken of it, so that you also may believe. What he said is true, and he knows that he speaks the truth.)
Jesus asked them, How can it be said that the Messiah will be the descendant of David?
But when Joseph heard that Archelaus had succeeded his father Herod as king of Judea, he was afraid to go there. He was given more instructions in a dream, so he went to the province of Galilee
Then they will answer him, When, Lord, did we ever see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and we would not help you?
While John's disciples were leaving, Jesus spoke about him to the crowds: When you went out to John in the desert, what did you expect to see? A blade of grass bending in the wind?
Jesus said to them, Watch out, and don't let anyone fool you.
they should hold to the revealed truth of the faith with a clear conscience.
If you see a believer commit a sin that does not lead to death, you should pray to God, who will give that person life. This applies to those whose sins do not lead to death. But there is sin which leads to death, and I do not say that you should pray to God about that.
they are excused from helping their father or mother.
For God wants you to silence the ignorant talk of foolish people by the good things you do.
so that, They may look and look, yet not see; they may listen and listen, yet not understand. For if they did, they would turn to God, and he would forgive them.
Two blind men who were sitting by the road heard that Jesus was passing by, so they began to shout, Son of David! Have mercy on us, sir!
and after he had eaten, his strength came back.Saul stayed for a few days with the believers in Damascus.
As they were going out, they met a man from Cyrene named Simon, and the soldiers forced him to carry Jesus' cross.
The teachers of the Law and the chief priests tried to arrest Jesus on the spot, because they knew that he had told this parable against them; but they were afraid of the people.
You don't know what you are asking for, Jesus answered the sons. Can you drink the cup of suffering that I am about to drink? We can, they answered.
It was faith that made Noah hear God's warnings about things in the future that he could not see. He obeyed God and built a boat in which he and his family were saved. As a result, the world was condemned, and Noah received from God the righteousness that comes by faith.
This is how we know what love is: Christ gave his life for us. We too, then, ought to give our lives for others!
With a loud cry Jesus died.
And this is what Christ himself promised to give us -- eternal life.
I have to boast, even though it doesn't do any good. But I will now talk about visions and revelations given me by the Lord.
I assure you that whoever does not receive the Kingdom of God like a child will never enter it.
Then they began to salute him: Long live the King of the Jews!
Again the man sent other slaves, more than the first time, and the tenants treated them the same way.
There is no condemnation now for those who live in union with Christ Jesus.
for you know that when your faith succeeds in facing such trials, the result is the ability to endure.
On Saturday evening we gathered together for the fellowship meal. Paul spoke to the people and kept on speaking until midnight, since he was going to leave the next day.
Then a voice said from heaven, This is my own dear Son, with whom I am pleased.
For God has already placed Jesus Christ as the one and only foundation, and no other foundation can be laid.
Huge hailstones, each weighing as much as a hundred pounds, fell from the sky on people, who cursed God on account of the plague of hail, because it was such a terrible plague.
Then the Son of Man will appear, coming in the clouds with great power and glory.
They took their money and started grumbling against the employer.
But he answered, I have food to eat that you know nothing about.
Remember how it was with you in the past. In those days, after God's light had shone on you, you suffered many things, yet were not defeated by the struggle.
Now, I am not at all concerned about being judged by you or by any human standard; I don't even pass judgment on myself.
Jesus went around visiting all the towns and villages. He taught in the synagogues, preached the Good News about the Kingdom, and healed people with every kind of disease and sickness.
For Moses commanded, Respect your father and your mother, and, If you curse your father or your mother, you are to be put to death.
So the man left and went all through the Ten Towns, telling what Jesus had done for him. And all who heard it were amazed.
But the one who was mistreating the other pushed Moses aside. Who made you ruler and judge over us? he asked.
When evening came, Jesus and his disciples left the city.
Are they Christ's servants? I sound like a madman -- but I am a better servant than they are! I have worked much harder, I have been in prison more times, I have been whipped much more, and I have been near death more often.
Our friends, we want you to know the truth about those who have died, so that you will not be sad, as are those who have no hope.
These people have received the Holy Spirit, just as we also did. Can anyone, then, stop them from being baptized with water?
they have no conscience; they do not keep their promises, and they show no kindness or pity for others.
Teacher, Moses wrote this law for us: If a man dies and leaves a wife but no children, that man's brother must marry  the widow so that they can have children who will be considered the dead man's children.
Then you will be able to live as the Lord wants and will always do what pleases him. Your lives will produce all kinds of good deeds, and you will grow in your knowledge of God.
He has kept the promise he made to our ancestors, and has come to the help of his servant Israel.
He has his winnowing shovel with him, to thresh out all the grain and gather the wheat into his barn; but he will burn the chaff in a fire that never goes out.
She got up at once and started walking around. (She was twelve years old.) When this happened, they were completely amazed.
Let us give thanks to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! For in our union with Christ he has blessed us by giving us every spiritual blessing in the heavenly world.
Now that you know this truth, how happy you will be if you put it into practice!
who is gentle as you correct your opponents, for it may be that God will give them the opportunity to repent and come to know the truth.
God called you to this through the Good News we preached to you; he called you to possess your share of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For I want very much to see you, in order to share a spiritual blessing with you to make you strong.
Then you will answer, We ate and drank with you; you taught in our town! 
Those who preach must preach God's messages; those who serve must serve with the strength that God gives them, so that in all things praise may be given to God through Jesus Christ, to whom belong glory and power forever and ever. Amen.
So when the men who were the first to be hired came to be paid, they thought they would get more; but they too were given a silver coin each.
but the angel said to them, Don't be afraid! I am here with good news for you, which will bring great joy to all the people.
and shining with the glory of God. The city shone like a precious stone, like a jasper, clear as crystal.
For anyone who wishes them peace becomes their partner in the evil things they do.
From the time after the exile in Babylon to the birth of Jesus, the following ancestors are listed: Jehoiachin, Shealtiel, Zerubbabel, Abiud, Eliakim, Azor, Zadok, Achim, Eliud, Eleazar, Matthan, Jacob, and Joseph, who married Mary, the mother of Jesus, who was called the Messiah.
Then Peter spoke up, Look, we have left everything and followed you.
Whoever makes himself great will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be made great.
The only one left to send was the man's own dear son. Last of all, then, he sent his son to the tenants. I am sure they will respect my son, he said.
I thank God that I did not baptize any of you except Crispus and Gaius.
So I hope to send him to you as soon as I know how things are going to turn out for me.
Euodia and Syntyche, please, I beg you, try to agree as sisters in the Lord.
Christ was without sin, but for our sake God made him share our sin in order that in union with him we might share the righteousness of God.
I urge you, then, to make me completely happy by having the same thoughts, sharing the same love, and being one in soul and mind.
The Pharisees asked him, Why, then, did Moses give the law for a man to hand his wife a divorce notice and send her away?
Then the king, the governor, Bernice, and all the others got up,
Jesus answered, Haven't you read the scripture that says that in the beginning the Creator made people male and female?
Everyone will be purified by fire as a sacrifice is purified by salt.
But Peter got up and ran to the tomb; he bent down and saw the grave cloths but nothing else. Then he went back home amazed at what had happened.
He said in a loud voice, Honor God and praise his greatness! For the time has come for him to judge all people. Worship him who made heaven, earth, sea, and the springs of water!
Jesus answered them, People who are well do not need a doctor, but only those who are sick.
That is why even the first covenant went into effect only with the use of blood.
Make it your aim to live a quiet life, to mind your own business, and to earn your own living, just as we told you before.
A fig tree, my friends, cannot bear olives; a grapevine cannot bear figs, nor can a salty spring produce sweet water.
Someone who is on the roof of a house must not lose time by going down into the house to get anything to take along.
put out fierce fires, escaped being killed by the sword. They were weak, but became strong; they were mighty in battle and defeated the armies of foreigners.
When he finds it, I tell you, he feels far happier over this one sheep than over the ninety-nine that did not get lost.
I will get up and go to my father and say, Father, I have sinned against God and against you.
If you think you are standing firm you had better be careful that you do not fall.
One night, when everyone was asleep, an enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat and went away.
He is the God of the living, not of the dead, for to him all are alive.
But if someone sitting in the meeting receives a message from God, the one who is speaking should stop.
And if someone asks you why you are doing that, say that the Master needs it and will send it back at once.
At once the commander took some officers and soldiers and rushed down to the crowd. When the people saw him with the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul.
He is not like other high priests; he does not need to offer sacrifices every day for his own sins first and then for the sins of the people. He offered one sacrifice, once and for all, when he offered himself.
It is through Christ that all of us, Jews and Gentiles, are able to come in the one Spirit into the presence of the Father.
When the Pharisees saw this, they said to Jesus, Look, it is against our Law for your disciples to do this on the Sabbath!
Her neighbors and relatives heard how wonderfully good the Lord had been to her, and they all rejoiced with her.
Jesus stood before the Roman governor, who questioned him. Are you the king of the Jews? he asked. So you say, answered Jesus.
But thanks be to God! For though at one time you were slaves to sin, you have obeyed with all your heart the truths found in the teaching you received.
No, indeed, the wise ones answered, there is not enough for you and for us. Go to the store and buy some for yourselves.
Go and find out what is meant by the scripture that says: It is kindness that I want, not animal sacrifices. I have not come to call respectable people, but outcasts.
And God's peace, which is far beyond human understanding, will keep your hearts and minds safe in union with Christ Jesus.
Jesus reached out and touched him. I do want to, he answered. Be clean! At once the disease left the man.
Jesus asked his disciples, What are you arguing with them about?
We can, they answered. Jesus said to them, You will indeed drink the cup I must drink and be baptized in the way I must be baptized.
Happy are those whose greatest desire is to do what God requires; God will satisfy them fully!
So if Satan's kingdom divides into groups, it cannot last, but will fall apart and come to an end.
Anyone who says something against the Son of Man can be forgiven; but whoever says something against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven -- now or ever.
But when the seventh angel blows his trumpet, then God will accomplish his secret plan, as he announced to his servants, the prophets.
Surely you have read this scripture? The stone which the builders rejected as worthless turned out to be the most important of all.
And I heard a voice from heaven that sounded like a roaring waterfall, like a loud peal of thunder. It sounded like the music made by musicians playing their harps.
because the Lamb, who is in the center of the throne, will be their shepherd, and he will guide them to springs of life-giving water. And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.
the older women as mothers, and the younger women as sisters, with all purity.
You yourselves are my witnesses that I said, I am not the Messiah, but I have been sent ahead of him.
Another mysterious sight appeared in the sky. There was a huge red dragon with seven heads and ten horns and a crown on each of his heads.
Then Levi had a big feast in his house for Jesus, and among the guests was a large number of tax collectors and other people.
There is a boy here who has five loaves of barley bread and two fish. But they will certainly not be enough for all these people.
When she saw Peter warming himself, she looked straight at him and said, You, too, were with Jesus of Nazareth.
These are the names of the twelve apostles: first, Simon (called Peter) and his brother Andrew; James and his brother John, the sons of Zebedee;
Share your belongings with your needy fellow Christians, and open your homes to strangers.
But after you have suffered for a little while, the God of all grace, who calls you to share his eternal glory in union with Christ, will himself perfect you and give you firmness, strength, and a sure foundation.
As a result the master of this dishonest manager praised him for doing such a shrewd thing; because the people of this world are much more shrewd in handling their affairs than the people who belong to the light.
times of spiritual strength will come from the Lord, and he will send Jesus, who is the Messiah he has already chosen for you.
So Judas went to the garden, taking with him a group of Roman soldiers, and some Temple guards sent by the chief priests and the Pharisees; they were armed and carried lanterns and torches.
because you still live as the people of this world live. When there is jealousy among you and you quarrel with one another, doesn't this prove that you belong to this world, living by its standards?
Those who do not carry their own cross and come after me cannot be my disciples.
(These are the things the pagans are always concerned about.) Your Father in heaven knows that you need all these things.
But some seeds fell in good soil, and the plants sprouted, grew, and bore grain: some had thirty grains, others sixty, and others one hundred.
The angel spoke to the women. You must not be afraid, he said. I know you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified.
Five days later the High Priest Ananias went to Caesarea with some elders and a lawyer named Tertullus. They appeared before Governor Felix and made their charges against Paul.
There is nothing that can be hid from God; everything in all creation is exposed and lies open before his eyes. And it is to him that we must all give an account of ourselves.
As the scripture says, All human beings are like grass, and all their glory is like wild flowers. The grass withers, and the flowers fall,
God did not choose us to suffer his anger, but to possess salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,
Listen to me: it is true that there were many widows in Israel during the time of Elijah, when there was no rain for three and a half years and a severe famine spread throughout the whole land.
The priests who serve in the Jewish place of worship have no right to eat any of the sacrifice on our altar.
And then from his mouth the dragon poured out a flood of water after the woman, so that it would carry her away.
Look at the crows: they don't plant seeds or gather a harvest; they don't have storage rooms or barns; God feeds them! You are worth so much more than birds!
So the disciples went and did what Jesus had told them to do:
The first one came and said, Sir, I have earned ten gold coins with the one you gave me.
This also includes you who are in Rome, whom God has called to belong to Jesus Christ.
Indeed, according to the Law almost everything is purified by blood, and sins are forgiven only if blood is poured out.
Jesus, then, is the High Priest that meets our needs. He is holy; he has no fault or sin in him; he has been set apart from sinners and raised above the heavens.
I know what you do; I know that you have a little power; you have followed my teaching and have been faithful to me. I have opened a door in front of you, which no one can close.
Take the teachings that you heard me proclaim in the presence of many witnesses, and entrust them to reliable people, who will be able to teach others also.
Jesus of Nazareth, they answered. I am he, he said. Judas, the traitor, was standing there with them.
As he scattered the seed in the field, some of it fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up.
When an evil spirit goes out of a person, it travels over dry country looking for a place to rest. If it can't find one,
As bad as you are, you know how to give good things to your children. How much more, then, will the Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!
For the blood of bulls and goats can never take away sins.
and evil persons and impostors will keep on going from bad to worse, deceiving others and being deceived themselves.
There is no need to write you, friends, about the times and occasions when these things will happen.
to your knowledge add self-control; to your self-control add endurance; to your endurance add godliness;
We also boast of our troubles, because we know that trouble produces endurance,
Those of you who try to be put right with God by obeying the Law have cut yourselves off from Christ. You are outside God's grace.
Then he returned to the three disciples and found them asleep; and he said to Peter, How is it that you three were not able to keep watch with me for even one hour?
(Jesus said this because some people were saying, He has an evil spirit in him.)
He is the disciple who spoke of these things, the one who also wrote them down; and we know that what he said is true.
He preferred to suffer with God's people rather than to enjoy sin for a little while.
and he answered, The knowledge of the secrets of the Kingdom of God has been given to you, but to the rest it comes by means of parables, so that they may look but not see, and listen but not understand.
He saw that his disciples were straining at the oars, because they were rowing against the wind; so sometime between three and six o'clock in the morning, he came to them, walking on the water. He was going to pass them by, 
Why should God reward you if you love only the people who love you? Even the tax collectors do that!
You can be sure that whoever gives even a drink of cold water to one of the least of these my followers because he is my follower, will certainly receive a reward.
But I was let down in a basket through an opening in the wall and escaped from him.
The people there were more openminded than the people in Thessalonica. They listened to the message with great eagerness, and every day they studied the Scriptures to see if what Paul said was really true.
Our Lord and God! You are worthy to receive glory, honor, and power. For you created all things, and by your will they were given existence and life.
He was some distance away when he saw Jesus; so he ran, fell on his knees before him,
All this you see -- the time will come when not a single stone here will be left in its place; every one will be thrown down.
Jesus answered, Let the dead bury their own dead. You go and proclaim the Kingdom of God.
gave thanks to God, broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you. Do this in memory of me.
So he went to work for one of the citizens of that country, who sent him out to his farm to take care of the pigs.
So they gathered them all and filled twelve baskets with the pieces left over from the five barley loaves which the people had eaten.
So he ordered them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay with them for a few days.
So get ready and go down, and do not hesitate to go with them, for I have sent them.
When the hired man, who is not a shepherd and does not own the sheep, sees a wolf coming, he leaves the sheep and runs away; so the wolf snatches the sheep and scatters them.
in the hope that I myself will be raised from death to life.
No indeed! And I tell you that if you do not turn from your sins, you will all die as they did.
At once the disease left the man, and he was clean.
The armies of heaven followed him, riding on white horses and dressed in clean white linen.
They obeyed his order, but among themselves they started discussing the matter, What does this rising from death mean?
In the same way the Spirit also comes to help us, weak as we are. For we do not know how we ought to pray; the Spirit himself pleads with God for us in groans that words cannot express.
With my own hand I write this: Greetings from Paul.This is the way I sign every letter; this is how I write.
Then the disciples came to Jesus and asked him, Why do you use parables when you talk to the people?
Jesus healed many who were sick with all kinds of diseases and drove out many demons. He would not let the demons say anything, because they knew who he was.
(:)
No, in all these things we have complete victory through him who loved us!
Then he took Paul and Silas up into his house and gave them some food to eat. He and his family were filled with joy, because they now believed in God.
Every year the parents of Jesus went to Jerusalem for the Passover Festival.
We sailed slowly for several days and with great difficulty finally arrived off the town of Cnidus. The wind would not let us go any farther in that direction, so we sailed down the sheltered side of the island of Crete, passing by Cape Salmone.
It was cold, so the servants and guards had built a charcoal fire and were standing around it, warming themselves. So Peter went over and stood with them, warming himself.
When Paul arrived, the Jews who had come from Jerusalem stood around him and started making many serious charges against him, which they were not able to prove.
So Jesus called them to him and spoke to them in parables: How can Satan drive out Satan?
In the case of an engaged couple who have decided not to marry: if the man feels that he is not acting properly toward the young woman and if his passions are too strong and he feels that they ought to marry, then they should get married, as he wants to. There is no sin in this.
Only prayer can drive this kind out, answered Jesus; nothing else can.
They threw dust on their heads, they cried and mourned, saying, How terrible! How awful for the great city! She is the city where all who have ships sailing the seas became rich on her wealth! And in one hour she has lost everything!
The number of men who were fed was five thousand.
while we sent Timothy, our brother who works with us for God in preaching the Good News about Christ. We sent him to strengthen you and help your faith,
I was so happy when some Christians arrived and told me how faithful you are to the truth -- just as you always live in the truth.
The crowd was so large that Jesus told his disciples to get a boat ready for him, so that the people would not crush him.
they will be unkind, merciless, slanderers, violent, and fierce; they will hate the good;
Yet some of you do not believe. (Jesus knew from the very beginning who were the ones that would not believe and which one would betray him.)
Since we have died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him.
For if there was glory in that which lasted for a while, how much more glory is there in that which lasts forever!
Paul traveled on to Derbe and Lystra, where a Christian named Timothy lived. His mother, who was also a Christian, was Jewish, but his father was a Greek.
Jesus is the one of whom the scripture says, The stone that you the builders despised turned out to be the most important of all.
All the people tried to touch him, for power was going out from him and healing them all.
When they were all full, he said to his disciples, Gather the pieces left over; let us not waste a bit.
And Jesus concluded, This is how it is with those who pile up riches for themselves but are not rich in God's sight.
At three o'clock Jesus cried out with a loud shout, Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani? which means, My God, my God, why did you abandon me?
As the Scriptures say: There is no one who is righteous,
They are wrong about sin, because they do not believe in me; 
Even after we arrived in Macedonia, we did not have any rest. There were troubles everywhere, quarrels with others, fears in our hearts.
So Jesus said again, I am telling you the truth: I am the gate for the sheep.
Jesus left that place and went back to his hometown, followed by his disciples.
The purpose of this order is to arouse the love that comes from a pure heart, a clear conscience, and a genuine faith.
Peter spoke up, Explain this saying to us.
The Law brings down God's anger; but where there is no law, there is no disobeying of the law.
After this, Jesus went to Jerusalem for a religious festival.
Now, you, my friends, are God's children as a result of his promise, just as Isaac was.
So the soldiers cut the ropes that held the boat and let it go.
The gospel keeps bringing blessings and is spreading throughout the world, just as it has among you ever since the day you first heard about the grace of God and came to know it as it really is.
Then the third angel poured out his bowl on the rivers and the springs of water, and they turned into blood.
Then I heard a voice from the altar saying, Lord God Almighty! True and just indeed are your judgments!
May you be made strong with all the strength which comes from his glorious power, so that you may be able to endure everything with patience. And with joy give thanks to the Father, who has made you fit to have your share of what God has reserved for his people in the kingdom of light.
As the scripture says, Who knows the mind of the Lord? Who is able to give him advice?
Then I saw the Lamb break open the first of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say in a voice that sounded like thunder, Come!
They met with the High Priest Annas and with Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and the others who belonged to the High Priest's family.
The Lord said to him, Get ready and go to Straight Street, and at the house of Judas ask for a man from Tarsus named Saul. He is praying,
So then, whatever you have said in the dark will be heard in broad daylight, and whatever you have whispered in private in a closed room will be shouted from the housetops.
because of the way in which you have helped me in the work of the gospel from the very first day until now.
Our purpose is to do what is right, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of others.
Martha was upset over all the work she had to do, so she came and said, Lord, don't you care that my sister has left me to do all the work by myself? Tell her to come and help me!
He must remain in heaven until the time comes for all things to be made new, as God announced through his holy prophets of long ago.
Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds, I find no reason to condemn this man.
and took a vow in the name of God, who lives forever and ever, who created heaven, earth, and the sea, and everything in them. The angel said, There will be no more delay!
As indeed he says in another passage, You will not allow your faithful servant to rot in the grave.
We know that God is right when he judges the people who do such things as these.
Barnabas and Saul finished their mission and returned from Jerusalem, taking John Mark with them.
Do not carry any gold, silver, or copper money in your pockets;
As for me, the hour has come for me to be sacrificed; the time is here for me to leave this life.
Now at last the Lord has helped me, she said. He has taken away my public disgrace!
so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.
And so, my dear friends, if our conscience does not condemn us, we have courage in God's presence.
Do not let all kinds of strange teachings lead you from the right way. It is good to receive inner strength from God's grace, and not by obeying rules about foods; those who obey these rules have not been helped by them.
Why, then, do you question me? Question the people who heard me. Ask them what I told them -- they know what I said.
Listen! says Jesus. I am coming soon! Happy are those who obey the prophetic words in this book!
He loves our people and he himself built a synagogue for us.
I assure you that those who declare publicly that they belong to me, the Son of Man will do the same for them before the angels of God.
Come back to your right senses and stop your sinful ways. I declare to your shame that some of you do not know God.
What, then, can we boast about? Nothing! And what is the reason for this? Is it that we obey the Law? No, but that we believe.
The messengers went back to the officer's house and found his servant well.
I, too, am a man placed under the authority of superior officers, and I have soldiers under me. I order this one, Go! and he goes; I order that one, Come! and he comes; and I order my slave, Do this! and he does it.
Jesus used parables to tell all these things to the crowds; he would not say a thing to them without using a parable.
So those who believe in the Son of God have this testimony in their own heart; but those who do not believe God, have made a liar of him, because they have not believed what God has said about his Son.
They got as far as the steps with him, and then the soldiers had to carry him because the mob was so wild.
It would also mean that the believers in Christ who have died are lost.
When I go, you will not be left all alone; I will come back to you.
Women should learn in silence and all humility.
so that you, together with all God's people, may have the power to understand how broad and long, how high and deep, is Christ's love.
There will be terrible earthquakes, famines, and plagues everywhere; there will be strange and terrifying things coming from the sky.
Be careful, then, how you listen; because those who have something will be given more, but whoever has nothing will have taken away from them even the little they think they have.
Does this mean that the Law is against God's promises? No, not at all! For if human beings had received a law that could bring life, then everyone could be put right with God by obeying it.
At about three o'clock Jesus cried out with a loud shout, Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani? which means, My God, my God, why did you abandon me?
and asked for letters of introduction to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he should find there any followers of the Way of the Lord, he would be able to arrest them, both men and women, and bring them back to Jerusalem.
But we belong to God. Whoever knows God listens to us; whoever does not belong to God does not listen to us. This, then, is how we can tell the difference between the Spirit of truth and the spirit of error.
Two other men, both of them criminals, were also led out to be put to death with Jesus.
Then Peter said, Look! We have left our homes to follow you.
If anyone should cause one of these little ones to lose faith in me, it would be better for that person to have a large millstone tied around the neck and be thrown into the sea.
In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ we command these people and warn them to lead orderly lives and work to earn their own living.
From the Elder -- To my dear Gaius, whom I truly love.
Do not think, however, that I am the one who will accuse you to my Father. Moses, in whom you have put your hope, is the very one who will accuse you.
He was a friend of the governor of the island, Sergius Paulus, who was an intelligent man. The governor called Barnabas and Saul before him because he wanted to hear the word of God.
Thomas said to him, Lord, we do not know where you are going; so how can we know the way to get there?
To the angel of the church in Smyrna write: This is the message from the one who is the first and the last, who died and lived again.
and had assured him that he would not die before he had seen the Lord's promised Messiah.
The people of the earth will be happy because of the death of these two. They will celebrate and send presents to each other, because those two prophets brought much suffering upon the whole human race.
and they sent the following letter by them: IP /We, the apostles and the elders, your brothers, send greetings to all our brothers of Gentile birth who live in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia.
They were all coming after him and screaming, Kill him!
Rising from his prayer, he went back to the disciples and found them asleep, worn out by their grief.
You must remember, my friends, that many times I have planned to visit you, but something has always kept me from doing so. I want to win converts among you also, as I have among other Gentiles.
And the seeds sown in the good soil stand for those who hear the message and understand it: they bear fruit, some as much as one hundred, others sixty, and others thirty.
So I will boast about this man -- but I will not boast about myself, except the things that show how weak I am.
But they would not say a thing. Jesus took the man, healed him, and sent him away.
A friend of mine who is on a trip has just come to my house, and I don't have any food for him!
My dear friend, do not imitate what is bad, but imitate what is good. Whoever does good belongs to God; whoever does what is bad has not seen God.
But you have not believed my message, which will come true at the right time. Because you have not believed, you will be unable to speak; you will remain silent until the day my promise to you comes true.
As the members of the Council listened to Stephen, they became furious and ground their teeth at him in anger.
Then Satan entered into Judas, called Iscariot, who was one of the twelve disciples.
We put aside all secret and shameful deeds; we do not act with deceit, nor do we falsify the word of God. In the full light of truth we live in God's sight and try to commend ourselves to everyone's good conscience.
Peter followed him out of the prison, not knowing, however, if what the angel was doing was real; he thought he was seeing a vision.
The locusts looked like horses ready for battle; on their heads they had what seemed to be crowns of gold, and their faces were like human faces.
And if a Christian woman is married to a man who is an unbeliever and he agrees to go on living with her, she must not divorce him.
Ask God to bless those who persecute you -- yes, ask him to bless, not to curse.
I, your Lord and Teacher, have just washed your feet. You, then, should wash one another's feet.
Greet one another with the kiss of peace. All the churches of Christ send you their greetings.
It was by their faith that people of ancient times won God's approval.
And so the Lord says, You must leave them and separate yourselves from them. Have nothing to do with what is unclean, and I will accept you.
It was faith that kept the prostitute Rahab from being killed with those who disobeyed God, for she gave the Israelite spies a friendly welcome.
He was going into a village when he was met by ten men suffering from a dreaded skin disease. They stood at a distance
Parents, do not treat your children in such a way as to make them angry. Instead, raise them with Christian discipline and instruction.
And there is another scripture that says, People will look at him whom they pierced.
From that day on the Jewish authorities made plans to kill Jesus.
I am telling you the truth, Jesus replied. Before Abraham was born, I Am'.
then you should all know, and all the people of Israel should know, that this man stands here before you completely well through the power of the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth -- whom you crucified and whom God raised from death.
God put all things under Christ's feet and gave him to the church as supreme Lord over all things.
he canceled the unfavorable record of our debts with its binding rules and did away with it completely by nailing it to the cross.
Pilate was surprised to hear that Jesus was already dead. He called the  army officer and asked him if Jesus had been dead a long time.
and many Judeans had come to see Martha and Mary to comfort them about their brother's death. 
But those who reject me publicly, the Son of Man will also reject them before the angels of God.
They confessed their sins, and he baptized them in the Jordan.
The chief priests and the whole Council tried to find some evidence against Jesus in order to put him to death, but they could not find any.
Be always humble, gentle, and patient. Show your love by being tolerant with one another.
Let us, then, who were the first to hope in Christ, praise God's glory!
Have the same concern for everyone. Do not be proud, but accept humble duties. Do not think of yourselves as wise.
This saying made the Jewish authorities all the more determined to kill him; not only had he broken the Sabbath law, but he had said that God was his own Father and in this way had made himself equal with God.
and have put on the new self. This is the new being which God, its Creator, is constantly renewing in his own image, in order to bring you to a full knowledge of himself.
They both got into the boat, and the wind died down.
Once when large crowds of people were going along with Jesus, he turned and said to them,
So they said to Aaron, Make us some gods who will lead us. We do not know what has happened to that man Moses, who brought us out of Egypt.
Be on your guard! I have told you everything ahead of time. 
If we continue to endure, we shall also rule with him. If we deny him, he also will deny us.
Jesus answered, This teaching does not apply to everyone, but only to those to whom God has given it.
because it does not go into your heart but into your stomach and then goes on out of the body. (In saying this, Jesus declared that all foods are fit to be eaten.)
Tell them not to speak evil of anyone, but to be peaceful and friendly, and always to show a gentle attitude toward everyone.
After all, it is none of my business to judge outsiders. God will judge them. But should you not judge the members of your own fellowship? As the scripture says, Remove the evil person from your group.
My dear friend, I pray that everything may go well with you and that you may be in good health -- as I know you are well in spirit.
But it also applies to you: every husband must love his wife as himself, and every wife must respect her husband.
When he was insulted, he did not answer back with an insult; when he suffered, he did not threaten, but placed his hopes in God, the righteous Judge.
It is written in your Law that when two witnesses agree, what they say is true.
(With the money that Judas got for his evil act he bought a field, where he fell to his death; he burst open and all his insides spilled out.
Many people, however, saw them leave and knew at once who they were; so they went from all the towns and ran ahead by land and arrived at the place ahead of Jesus and his disciples.
That will be the time when people will say to the mountains, Fall on us! and to the hills, Hide us!
Above everything, love one another earnestly, because love covers over many sins.
Now, there were seven brothers who used to live here. The oldest got married and died without having children, so he left his widow to his brother.
The person who will eat anything is not to despise the one who doesn't; while the one who eats only vegetables is not to pass judgment on the one who will eat anything; for God has accepted that person.
when he comes on that Day to receive glory from all his people and honor from all who believe. You too will be among them, because you have believed the message that we told you.
Jesus said to her, Mary! She turned toward him and said in Hebrew, Rabboni! (This means Teacher.)
Greet one another with the kiss of peace.
and say to the owner of the house: The Teacher says to you, Where is the room where my disciples and I will eat the Passover meal?
God had already decided that through Jesus Christ he would make us his children -- this was his pleasure and purpose.
But no one has ever been able to tame the tongue. It is evil and uncontrollable, full of deadly poison.
Keep away from profane and foolish discussions, which only drive people farther away from God.
they are envious, get drunk, have orgies, and do other things like these. I warn you now as I have before: those who do these things will not possess the Kingdom of God.
I assure you that whoever tells this hill to get up and throw itself in the sea and does not doubt in his heart, but  believes that what he says will happen, it will be done for him.
Those who do evil things hate the light and will not come to the light, because they do not want their evil deeds to be shown up.
The one whom God has sent speaks God's words, because God gives him the fullness of his Spirit.
They were screaming, waving their clothes, and throwing dust up in the air.
But Paul and Barnabas spoke out even more boldly: It was necessary that the word of God should be spoken first to you. But since you reject it and do not consider yourselves worthy of eternal life, we will leave you and go to the Gentiles.
I am speaking the truth; I belong to Christ and I do not lie. My conscience, ruled by the Holy Spirit, also assures me that I am not lying
It was for this reason that these Jews seized me while I was in the Temple, and they tried to kill me.
For with his strong arguments he defeated the Jews in public debates by proving from the Scriptures that Jesus is the Messiah.
It is clear that Christ himself wrote this letter and sent it by us. It is written, not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, and not on stone tablets but on human hearts.
The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
I assure you that on the Judgment Day God will show more mercy to Sodom than to that town!
The women were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James; they and the other women with them told these things to the apostles.
She was given the two wings of a large eagle in order to fly to her place in the desert, where she will be taken care of for three and a half years, safe from the dragon's attack.
will receive much more in this present age and eternal life in the age to come.
When someone asks you for something, give it to him; when someone wants to borrow something, lend it to him.
The commander said, I became one by paying a large amount of money. But I am one by birth, Paul answered.
Early on Sunday morning, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb and saw that the stone had been taken away from the entrance.
If our conscience condemns us, we know that God is greater than our conscience and that he knows everything.
He went into the presence of Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. Pilate gave orders for the body to be given to Joseph.
Pray, then, that I may speak, as I should, in such a way as to make it clear.
The Lord answered, Who, then, is the faithful and wise servant? He is the one that his master will put in charge, to run the household and give the other servants their share of the food at the proper time.
There before the people they could not catch him in a thing, so they kept quiet, amazed at his answer.
Avoid the passions of youth, and strive for righteousness, faith, love, and peace, together with those who with a pure heart call out to the Lord for help.
Yet you are not willing to come to me in order to have life.
Since we are his children, we will possess the blessings he keeps for his people, and we will also possess with Christ what God has kept for him; for if we share Christ's suffering, we will also share his glory.
The crowds walking in front of Jesus and those walking behind began to shout, Praise to David's Son! God bless him who comes in the name of the Lord! Praise be to God!
So Jesus called them all together and said, You know that the rulers of the heathen have power over them, and the leaders have complete authority.
So our hope in you is never shaken; we know that just as you share in our sufferings, you also share in the help we receive.
In this matter, then, none of you should do wrong to other Christians or take advantage of them. We have told you this before, and we strongly warned you that the Lord will punish those who do that.
This is what the parable means: the seed is the word of God.
I assure you that there are some here who will not die until they have seen the Son of Man come as King.
They spent their time in learning from the apostles, taking part in the fellowship, and sharing in the fellowship meals and the prayers.
I looked, and there was a white horse. Its rider held a bow, and he was given a crown. He rode out as a conqueror to conquer.
But now God's way of putting people right with himself has been revealed. It has nothing to do with law, even though the Law of Moses and the prophets gave their witness to it.
I have complete confidence in the gospel; it is God's power to save all who believe, first the Jews and also the Gentiles.
If, then, as we try to be put right with God by our union with Christ, we are found to be sinners, as much as the Gentiles are -- does this mean that Christ is serving the cause of sin? By no means!
Well, then, what kind of baptism did you receive? Paul asked. The baptism of John, they answered.
When the crowd saw that Jesus was not there, nor his disciples, they got into those boats and went to Capernaum, looking for him.
In the case of the priests the tenth is collected by men who die; but as for Melchizedek the tenth was collected by one who lives, as the scripture says.
How can you be sure, Christian wife, that you will not save your husband? Or how can you be sure, Christian husband, that you will not save your wife?
So do not be surprised, my friends, if the people of the world hate you.
Jesus said this as he taught in the synagogue in Capernaum.
Jesus answered, I performed one miracle, and you were all surprised.
Throughout our lives we are always in danger of death for Jesus' sake, in order that his life may be seen in this mortal body of ours.
Then the fourth angel blew his trumpet. A third of the sun was struck, and a third of the moon, and a third of the stars, so that their light lost a third of its brightness; there was no light during a third of the day and a third of the night also.
And you must not call anyone here on earth Father, because you have only the one Father in heaven.
Jesus said to the man, Come up here to the front.
while the crowd of people outside prayed during the hour when the incense was burned.
Take such lifeless musical instruments as the flute or the harp -- how will anyone know the tune that is being played unless the notes are sounded distinctly?
I tell you, Peter, Jesus said, the rooster will not crow tonight until you have said three times that you do not know me.
Jesus paid no attention to what they said, but told him, Don't be afraid, only believe.
Then the Lamb broke open the third seal; and I heard the third living creature say, Come! I looked, and there was a black horse. Its rider held a pair of scales in his hand.
The disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, It is the Lord! When Peter heard that it was the Lord, he wrapped his outer garment around him (for he had taken his clothes off) and jumped into the water.
Just as he arrived at the gate of the town, a funeral procession was coming out. The dead man was the only son of a woman who was a widow, and a large crowd from the town was with her.
It would be better for him if a large millstone were tied around his neck and he were thrown into the sea than for him to cause one of these little ones to sin.
After I come, I shall give letters of introduction to those you have approved, and send them to take your gift to Jerusalem.
They make proud and stupid statements, and use immoral bodily lusts to trap those who are just beginning to escape from among people who live in error.
then you are guilty of creating distinctions among yourselves and of making judgments based on evil motives.
where the people recognized Jesus. So they sent for the sick people in all the surrounding country and brought them to Jesus.
They have authority to shut up the sky so that there will be no rain during the time they proclaim God's message. They have authority also over the springs of water, to turn them into blood; they have authority also to strike the earth with every kind of plague as often as they wish.
These ten all have the same purpose, and they give their power and authority to the beast.
Everyone who falls on that stone will be cut to pieces; and if that stone falls on someone, that person will be crushed to dust.
Timothy, my fellow worker, sends you his greetings; and so do Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, fellow Jews.
I consider that what we suffer at this present time cannot be compared at all with the glory that is going to be revealed to us.
The time was near for the Festival of Unleavened Bread, which is called the Passover.
At that very hour of the night the jailer took them and washed their wounds; and he and all his family were baptized at once.
three times I was whipped by the Romans; and once I was stoned. I have been in three shipwrecks, and once I spent twenty-four hours in the water.
Then Jesus asked them, Don't you understand this parable? How, then, will you ever understand any parable?
and of making all people see how God's secret plan is to be put into effect. God, who is the Creator of all things, kept his secret hidden through all the past ages,
It was at this time that Moses was born, a very beautiful child. He was cared for at home for three months,
So take courage, men! For I trust in God that it will be just as I was told.
Make certain you do not perform your religious duties in public so that people will see what you do. If you do these things publicly, you will not have any reward from your Father in heaven.
Put on all the armor that God gives you, so that you will be able to stand up against the Devil's evil tricks.
And so God sends the power of error to work in them so that they believe what is false.
For the Lord watches over the righteous and listens to their prayers; but he opposes those who do evil.
Guard against turning back from the grace of God. Let no one become like a bitter plant that grows up and causes many troubles with its poison.
But I have nothing definite about him to write to the Emperor. So I have brought him here before you -- and especially before you, King Agrippa! -- so that, after investigating his case, I may have something to write.
They answered, You were born and brought up in sin -- and you are trying to teach us? And they expelled him from the synagogue.
Everyone must die once, and after that be judged by God.
When Jesus left that place, the teachers of the Law and the Pharisees began to criticize him bitterly and ask him questions about many things,
Will you gain anything if you win the whole world but are yourself lost or defeated? Of course not!
Tell them to give up those legends and those long lists of ancestors, which only produce arguments; they do not serve God's plan, which is known by faith.
while Peter stayed outside by the gate. Then the other disciple went back out, spoke to the girl at the gate, and brought Peter inside.
But not everyone knows this truth. Some people have been so used to idols that to this day when they eat such food they still think of it as food that belongs to an idol; their conscience is weak, and they feel they are defiled by the food.
The voice spoke again from heaven, Do not consider anything unclean that God has declared clean.
Then it goes out and brings seven other spirits even worse than itself, and they come and live there. So when it is all over, that person is in worse shape than at the beginning.
Watch, then, because you do not know when the master of the house is coming -- it might be in the evening or at midnight or before dawn or at sunrise.
A widow who is all alone, with no one to take care of her, has placed her hope in God and continues to pray and ask him for his help night and day.
Jesus asked, What is the Kingdom of God like? What shall I compare it with?
And they said, We don't need any witnesses! We ourselves have heard what he said!
I speak now as though you were my children: show us the same feelings that we have for you. Open your hearts wide!
He became hungry and wanted something to eat; while the food was being prepared, he had a vision.
hoping to eat the bits of food that fell from the rich man's table. Even the dogs would come and lick his sores.
Out of his mouth came a sharp sword, with which he will defeat the nations. He will rule over them with a rod of iron, and he will trample out the wine in the wine press of the furious anger of the Almighty God.
Be glad, heaven, because of her destruction! Be glad, God's people and the apostles and prophets! For God has condemned her for what she did to you!
If you show more respect to the well-dressed man and say to him, Have this best seat here, but say to the poor man, Stand over there, or sit here on the floor by my feet,
Keep what you believe about this matter, then, between yourself and God. Happy are those who do not feel guilty when they do something they judge is right!
A Canaanite woman who lived in that region came to him. Son of David! she cried out. Have mercy on me, sir! My daughter has a demon and is in a terrible condition.
There was a total of  of us on board.
How long has he been like this? Jesus asked the father. Ever since he was a child, he replied.
Be careful, then, and do not refuse to hear him who speaks. Those who refused to hear the one who gave the divine message on earth did not escape. How much less shall we escape, then, if we turn away from the one who speaks from heaven!
Jesus said to them, I have done many good deeds in your presence which the Father gave me to do; for which one of these do you want to stone me?
and so I endure everything for the sake of God's chosen people, in order that they too may obtain the salvation that comes through Christ Jesus and brings eternal glory.
It is God who clothes the wild grass -- grass that is here today and gone tomorrow, burned up in the oven. Won't he be all the more sure to clothe you? What little faith you have!
do not be stubborn, as your ancestors were when they rebelled against God, as they were that day in the desert when they put him to the test.
Then he said to the disciples, Let us go back to Judea.
My friends, as believers in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, you must never treat people in different ways according to their outward appearance.
For not only did the message about the Lord go out from you throughout Macedonia and Achaia, but the news about your faith in God has gone everywhere. There is nothing, then, that we need to say.
Surely you have heard that God in his grace has given me this work to do for your good.
We must not put the Lord to the test, as some of them did -- and they were killed by snakes.
But if we live in the light -- just as he is in the light -- then we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus, his Son, purifies us from every sin.
Glory to God in the highest heaven, and peace on earth to those with whom he is pleased! 
There he met a man named Aeneas, who was paralyzed and had not been able to get out of bed for eight years.
- We write to you only what you can read and understand. But even though you now understand us only in part, I hope that you will come to understand us completely, so that in the Day of our Lord Jesus you can be as proud of us as we shall be of you.
But Jesus kept quiet and would not say a word. Again the High Priest questioned him, Are you the Messiah, the Son of the Blessed God?
Jesus answered, How terrible also for you teachers of the Law! You put onto people's backs loads which are hard to carry, but you yourselves will not stretch out a finger to help them carry those loads.
save others by snatching them out of the fire; and to others show mercy mixed with fear, but hate their very clothes, stained by their sinful lusts.
And accept salvation as a helmet, and the word of God as the sword which the Spirit gives you.
For this reason God raised him to the highest place above and gave him the name that is greater than any other name.
His face gleamed like such precious stones as jasper and carnelian, and all around the throne there was a rainbow the color of an emerald.
I have no demon, Jesus answered. I honor my Father, but you dishonor me.
And I beg you even more earnestly to pray that God will send me back to you soon.
I have already told you, he answered, and you would not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Maybe you, too, would like to be his disciples?
You will become pregnant and give birth to a son, and you will name him Jesus.
You love him, although you have not seen him, and you believe in him, although you do not now see him. So you rejoice with a great and glorious joy which words cannot express,
They came to him and said, Teacher, we know that you tell the truth, without worrying about what people think. You pay no attention to anyone's status, but teach the truth about God's will for people. Tell us, is it against our Law to pay taxes to the Roman Emperor? Should we pay them or not?
God's temple in heaven was opened, and the Covenant Box was seen there. Then there were flashes of lightning, rumblings and peals of thunder, an earthquake, and heavy hail.
Now Timothy has come back, and he has brought us the welcome news about your faith and love. He has told us that you always think well of us and that you want to see us just as much as we want to see you.
For when we lived according to our human nature, the sinful desires stirred up by the Law were at work in our bodies, and all we did ended in death.
Jesus gave a command to the demon, and it went out of the boy, and at that very moment he was healed.
I fast two days a week, and I give you one tenth of all my income.
By Christ's truth in me, I promise that this boast of mine will not be silenced anywhere in all of Achaia.
When Jesus entered Jerusalem, the whole city was thrown into an uproar. Who is he? the people asked. 
And Jesus went on to say, And so I tell you: make friends for yourselves with worldly wealth, so that when it gives out, you will be welcomed in the eternal home.
Then Jesus ordered his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Messiah.
For this reason Christ is the one who arranges a new covenant, so that those who have been called by God may receive the eternal blessings that God has promised. This can be done because there has been a death which sets people free from the wrongs they did while the first covenant was in effect.
They brought them before the Roman officials and said, These men are Jews, and they are causing trouble in our city.
When John the Baptist heard in prison about the things that Christ was doing, he sent some of his disciples to him.
On another Sabbath Jesus went into a synagogue and taught. A man was there whose right hand was paralyzed.
Then Jesus' mother and brothers arrived. They stood outside the house and sent in a message, asking for him.
The official replied, How can I understand unless someone explains it to me? And he invited Philip to climb up and sit in the carriage with him.
The Pharisees then said to one another, You see, we are not succeeding at all! Look, the whole world is following him!
But you teach that if people have something they could use to help their father or mother, but say, This is Corban (which means, it belongs to God),
Suddenly two men were there talking with him. They were Moses and Elijah,
All the Jews and Gentiles who lived in Ephesus heard about this; they were all filled with fear, and the name of the Lord Jesus was given greater honor.
I am jealous for you, just as God is; you are like a pure virgin whom I have promised in marriage to one man only, Christ himself.
There is really no need for me to write you about the help being sent to God's people in Judea.
We had been there for several days when a prophet named Agabus arrived from Judea.
The owner sent another slave, and they killed him; and they treated many  others the same way, beating some and killing others.
If we live, it is for the Lord that we live, and if we die, it is for the Lord that we die. So whether we live or die, we belong to the Lord.
Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the world. No, I did not come to bring peace, but a sword.
and constant arguments from people whose minds do not function and who no longer have the truth. They think that religion is a way to become rich.
So then, you also must always be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour when you are not expecting him.
How happy I am that I can depend on you completely!
Saul got up from the ground and opened his eyes, but could not see a thing. So they took him by the hand and led him into Damascus.
Then Festus, after conferring with his advisers, answered, You have appealed to the Emperor, so to the Emperor you will go.
So he had John beheaded in prison.
Then he took a cup, gave thanks to God, and gave it to them. Drink it, all of you, he said;
Pilate said to him, You will not speak to me? Remember, I have the authority to set you free and also to have you crucified.
On the Judgment Day the Queen of Sheba will stand up and accuse the people of today, because she traveled  all the way from her country to listen to King Solomon's wise teaching; and there is something here, I tell you, greater than Solomon.
In the same way good deeds are plainly seen, and even those that are not so plain cannot be hidden.
Jesus said to them, When you pray, say this: Father: May your holy name be honored; may your Kingdom come.
-And when you stand and pray, forgive anything you may have against anyone, so that your Father in heaven will forgive the wrongs you have done.
Many will give up their faith at that time; they will betray one another and hate one another.
You know very well that we did not come to you with flattering talk, nor did we use words to cover up greed -- God is our witness!
Then some men stood up and told this lie against Jesus:
But as for you, continue in the truths that you were taught and firmly believe. You know who your teachers were,
because his only daughter, who was twelve years old, was dying. As Jesus went along, the people were crowding him from every side. 
So he called them all together with others whose work was like theirs and said to them, Men, you know that our prosperity comes from this work.
So he sent off a guard at once with orders to bring John's head. The guard left, went to the prison, and cut John's head off;
No! We believe and are saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus, just as they are.
In conclusion, my friends, be joyful in your union with the Lord. I don't mind repeating what I have written before, and you will be safer if I do so.
For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles, pray to God.
You teach others -- why don't you teach yourself? You preach, Do not steal -- but do you yourself steal?
How happy they are if he finds them ready, even if he should come at midnight or even later!
So Mary Magdalene went and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord and related to them what he had told her.
I want you to know that no one who is led by God's Spirit can say A curse on Jesus! and no one can confess Jesus is Lord, without being guided by the Holy Spirit.
So Jesus called a child to come and stand in front of them,
He cried out in a loud voice: She has fallen! Great Babylon has fallen! She is now haunted by demons and unclean spirits; all kinds of filthy and hateful birds live in her.
We must not be proud or irritate one another or be jealous of one another.
you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.
Then they tried to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come.
Dedicate them to yourself by means of the truth; your word is truth.
Tell me, what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes indeed, but you saw much more than a prophet.
And so encourage one another and help one another, just as you are now doing.
The servant woman saw him there and began to repeat to the bystanders, He is one of them!
Listen! As for that group that belongs to Satan, those liars who claim that they are Jews but are not, I will make them come and bow down at your feet. They will all know that I love you.
They looked straight at him, and Peter said, Look at us!
But now I am going to him who sent me, yet none of you asks me where I am going.
His choice is based on his grace, not on what they have done. For if God's choice were based on what people do, then his grace would not be real grace.
But he who joins himself to the Lord becomes spiritually one with him.
He said, The Jewish authorities have agreed to ask you tomorrow to take Paul down to the Council, pretending that the Council wants to get more accurate information about him.
Pray to God that these things will not happen in the winter!
The crowd answered back, We have a law that says he ought to die, because he claimed to be the Son of God.
It is the same with you; when you have done all you have been told to do, say, We are ordinary servants; we have only done our duty.
Happy are the pure in heart; they will see God!
He went a little farther on and saw two other brothers, James and John, the sons of Zebedee. They were in their boat getting their nets ready.
And so it was that Joseph, a Levite born in Cyprus, whom the apostles called Barnabas (which means One who Encourages),
You are doing what your father did. God himself is the only Father we have, they answered, and we are his true children.
From Jude, servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James -- To those who have been called by God, who live in the love of God the Father and the protection of Jesus Christ:
They were all terrified when they saw him. Jesus spoke to them at once, Courage! he said. It is I. Don't be afraid!
I am the first and the last, says the Lord God Almighty, who is, who was, and who is to come.
Some of the disciples were talking about the Temple, how beautiful it looked with its fine stones and the gifts offered to God. Jesus said,
[No one, sir, she answered. Well, then, Jesus said, I do not condemn you either. Go, but do not sin again.]
I will go on doing what I am doing now, in order to keep those other apostles from having any reason for boasting and saying that they work in the same way that we do.
Let the wheat and the weeds both grow together until harvest. Then I will tell the harvest workers to pull up the weeds first, tie them in bundles and burn them, and then to gather in the wheat and put it in my barn.
Let no one become immoral or unspiritual like Esau, who for a single meal sold his rights as the older son.
Let us see the Messiah, the king of Israel, come down from the cross now, and we will believe in him! And the two who were crucified with Jesus insulted him also.
Happy is the one who reads this book, and happy are those who listen to the words of this prophetic message and obey what is written in this book! For the time is near when all these things will happen.
The bridegroom was late in coming, so they began to nod and fall asleep.
Don't you know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit, who lives in you and who was given to you by God? You do not belong to yourselves but to God;
Children, it is your Christian duty to obey your parents always, for that is what pleases God.
He also said, You, Lord, in the beginning created the earth, and with your own hands you made the heavens.
(Jesus already knew who was going to betray him; that is why he said, All of you, except one, are clean.)
If you are eager to give, God will accept your gift on the basis of what you have to give, not on what you don't have.
But we belong to the day, and we should be sober. We must wear faith and love as a breastplate, and our hope of salvation as a helmet.
and when he swears by the Temple, he is swearing by it and by God, who lives there;
Then I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and they were given seven trumpets.
[They said this to trap Jesus, so that they could accuse him. But he bent over and wrote on the ground with his finger.]
Then the disciples went back home.
There is a secret truth, my friends, which I want you to know, for it will keep you from thinking how wise you are. It is that the stubbornness of the people of Israel is not permanent, but will last only until the complete number of Gentiles comes to God.
But the temple Jesus was speaking about was his body.
Now that by your obedience to the truth you have purified yourselves and have come to have a sincere love for other believers, love one another earnestly with all your heart.
How much bread do you have? Jesus asked. Seven loaves, they answered.
He called his disciples together and said to them, I tell you that this poor widow put more in the offering box than all the others.
My friends, be careful that none of you have a heart so evil and unbelieving that you will turn away from the living God.
Now you can take part with me in the battle. It is the same battle you saw me fighting in the past, and as you hear, the one I am fighting still.
Two or three who are given God's message should speak, while the others are to judge what they say.
Jesus said to Peter, I tell you that before the rooster crows tonight, you will say three times that you do not know me.
None of the rulers of this world knew this wisdom. If they had known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
At this the disciples were completely amazed and asked one another, Who, then, can be saved?
Jesus knew that they were about to come and seize him in order to make him king by force; so he went off again to the hills by himself.
You imitated us and the Lord; and even though you suffered much, you received the message with the joy that comes from the Holy Spirit.
It is we, not they, who have received the true circumcision, for we worship God by means of his Spirit and rejoice in our life in union with Christ Jesus. We do not put any trust in external ceremonies.
But now, in union with Christ Jesus you, who used to be far away, have been brought near by the blood of Christ.
In a circle around the throne were twenty-four other thrones, on which were seated twenty-four elders dressed in white and wearing crowns of gold.
All God's people here send greetings, especially those who belong to the Emperor's palace.
Then he took a child and had him stand in front of them. He put his arms around him and said to them,
Bethlehem in the land of Judah, you are by no means the least of the leading cities of Judah; for from you will come a leader who will guide my people Israel.
The people were amazed as they saw the dumb speaking, the crippled made whole, the lame walking, and the blind seeing; and they praised the God of Israel.
to be shepherds of the flock that God gave you and to take care of it willingly, as God wants you to, and not unwillingly. Do your work, not for mere pay, but from a real desire to serve.
Or, if people should tell you, Look, he is out in the desert!' -- don't go there; or if they say, Look, he is hiding here!' -- don't believe it.
You are witnesses of these things.
Everyone will hate you because of me. But whoever holds out to the end will be saved.
pray at all times,
Anyone who has to drink milk is still a child, without any experience in the matter of right and wrong.
and that is why I was sent as an apostle and teacher of the Gentiles, to proclaim the message of faith and truth. I am not lying; I am telling the truth!
At once the Spirit made him go into the desert,
But the tax collector stood at a distance and would not even raise his face to heaven, but beat on his breast and said, God, have pity on me, a sinner!
If you forgive people's sins, they are forgiven; if you do not forgive them, they are not forgiven.
For God did not send his Son into the world to be its judge, but to be its savior.
Instead, one Christian goes to court against another and lets unbelievers judge the case!
And early in the morning you say, It is going to rain, because the sky is red and dark. You can predict the weather by looking at the sky, but you cannot interpret the signs concerning these times!
We who are strong in the faith ought to help the weak to carry their burdens. We should not please ourselves.
My fellow Jews, listen to me as I make my defense before you!
While I was praying in the city of Joppa, I had a vision. I saw something coming down that looked like a large sheet being lowered by its four corners from heaven, and it stopped next to me.
Jesus said to him, There was once a man who was giving a great feast to which he invited many people.
And so they were not able to believe, because Isaiah also said,
When he heard that Jesus had come from Judea to Galilee, he went to him and asked him to go to Capernaum and heal his son, who was about to die.
Let us rejoice and be glad; let us praise his greatness! For the time has come for the wedding of the Lamb, and his bride has prepared herself for it.
That is why his parents said, He is old enough; ask him!
When Jesus returned to the other side of the lake, the people welcomed him, because they had all been waiting for him.
Jesus knew what they were thinking, so he took a child, stood him by his side,
All wrongdoing is sin, but there is sin which does not lead to death.
If you listen to the word, but do not put it into practice you are like people who look in a mirror and see themselves as they are.
my soul is glad because of God my Savior, 
They stand a long way off, because they are afraid of sharing in her suffering. They say, How terrible! How awful! This great and mighty city Babylon! In just one hour you have been punished!
He says that we will look for him but will not find him, and that we cannot go where he will be. What does he mean?
I am less than the least of all God's people; yet God gave me this privilege of taking to the Gentiles the Good News about the infinite riches of Christ,
So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. Pilate said to them, Look! Here is the man!
And then he says, I will not remember their sins and evil deeds any longer.
Happy are those who know they are spiritually poor; the Kingdom of heaven belongs to them!
About this time King Herod began to persecute some members of the church.
While Paul was waiting in Athens for Silas and Timothy, he was greatly upset when he noticed how full of idols the city was.
And now send some men to Joppa for a certain man whose full name is Simon Peter.
But even though he was God's Son, he learned through his sufferings to be obedient.
I have done my best in the race, I have run the full distance, and I have kept the faith.
He is coming after me, but I am not good enough even to untie his sandals.
So they left the tomb in a hurry, afraid and yet filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples.
And for their sake I dedicate myself to you, in order that they, too, may be truly dedicated to you.
The commander took him by the hand, led him off by himself, and asked him, What do you have to tell me?
Sir, they answered, we want you to give us our sight!
When they heard this noise, a large crowd gathered. They were all excited, because all of them heard the believers talking in their own languages.
Then I heard what sounded like a crowd, like the sound of a roaring waterfall, like loud peals of thunder. I heard them say, Praise God! For the Lord, our Almighty God, is King!
For this reason I fall on my knees before the Father,
Then Jesus said to them, I ask you: What does our Law allow us to do on the Sabbath? To help or to harm? To save someone's life or destroy it?
There was much whispering about him in the crowd. He is a good man, some people said. No, others said, he fools the people.
Simon's mother-in-law was sick in bed with a fever, and as soon as Jesus arrived, he was told about her.
Then the owner sent another slave; the tenants beat him over the head and treated him shamefully.
You can be sure that on the Judgment Day you will have to give account of every useless word you have ever spoken.
And if Christ has not been raised, then your faith is a delusion and you are still lost in your sins.
in order that at the present time, by means of the church, the angelic rulers and powers in the heavenly world might learn of his wisdom in all its different forms.
And because he is himself weak, he must offer sacrifices not only for the sins of the people but also for his own sins.
and have a reputation for good deeds: a woman who brought up her children well, received strangers in her home, performed humble duties for other Christians, helped people in trouble, and devoted herself to doing good.
Just before dawn, Paul begged them all to eat some food: You have been waiting for fourteen days now, and all this time you have not eaten a thing.
The Master needs it, they answered,
You will be expelled from the synagogues, and the time will come when those who kill you will think that by doing this they are serving God.
They will completely destroy you and the people within your walls; not a single stone will they leave in its place, because you did not recognize the time when God came to save you!
Then Jesus spoke to the crowd, Did you have to come with swords and clubs to capture me, as though I were an outlaw? Every day I sat down and taught in the Temple, and you did not arrest me.
I have shown you in all things that by working hard in this way we must help the weak, remembering the words that the Lord Jesus himself said, There is more happiness in giving than in receiving.
So Paul took the men and the next day performed the ceremony of purification with them. Then he went into the Temple and gave notice of how many days it would be until the end of the period of purification, when a sacrifice would be offered for each one of them.
We could not convince him, so we gave up and said, May the Lord's will be done.
I went to the angel and asked him to give me the little scroll. He said to me, Take it and eat it; it will turn sour in your stomach, but in your mouth it will be sweet as honey.
As they talked and discussed, Jesus himself drew near and walked along with them;
trying to lay traps for him and catch him saying something wrong.
As Jesus sat near the Temple treasury, he watched the people as they dropped in their money. Many rich men dropped in a lot of money;
If you love only the people who love you, why should you receive a blessing? Even sinners love those who love them!
This is a true saying: If we have died with him, we shall also live with him.
Solid food, on the other hand, is for adults, who through practice are able to distinguish between good and evil.
It is no use for them to worship me, because they teach human rules as though they were my laws!
After he had said this, he called out in a loud voice, Lazarus, come out!
The chief priests were accusing Jesus of many things,
But a Samaritan who was traveling that way came upon the man, and when he saw him, his heart was filled with pity.
They are the spirits of demons that perform miracles. These three spirits go out to all the kings of the world, to bring them together for the battle on the great Day of Almighty God.
(They still did not understand the scripture which said that he must rise from death.)
they had come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. Those who were troubled by evil spirits also came and were healed.
The daughter of Herodias came in and danced, and pleased Herod and his guests. So the king said to the girl, What would you like to have? I will give you anything you want.
All people living on earth will worship it, except those whose names were written before the creation of the world in the book of the living which belongs to the Lamb that was killed.
and your host, who invited both of you, would have to come and say to you, Let him have this place. Then you would be embarrassed and have to sit in the lowest place.
The very fact that you have legal disputes among yourselves shows that you have failed completely. Would it not be better for you to be wronged? Would it not be better for you to be robbed?
It was concerning this salvation that the prophets made careful search and investigation, and they prophesied about this gift which God would give you.
When Moses heard this, he fled from Egypt and went to live in the land of Midian. There he had two sons.
So John appeared in the desert, baptizing and preaching. Turn away from your sins and be baptized, he told the people, and God will forgive your sins.
The angel also showed me the river of the water of life, sparkling like crystal, and coming from the throne of God and of the Lamb
For David said about him, I saw the Lord before me at all times; he is near me, and I will not be troubled.
The wall was made of jasper, and the city itself was made of pure gold, as clear as glass.
Once more Jesus went away and prayed, My Father, if this cup of suffering cannot be taken away unless I drink it, your will be done.
For it is not ourselves that we preach; we preach Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus' sake.
Be sure, then, to keep in your hearts the message you heard from the beginning. If you keep that message, then you will always live in union with the Son and the Father.
Jesus answered, You see these great buildings? Not a single stone here will be left in its place; every one of them will be thrown down.
When they came to Jesus, they said, John the Baptist sent us to ask if you are the one he said was going to come, or should we expect someone else?
You will have all the proof you want that Christ speaks through me. When he deals with you, he is not weak; instead, he shows his power among you.
He is really John the Baptist, who has come back to life, he told his officials. That is why he has this power to perform miracles.
So we urged Titus, who began this work, to continue it and help you complete this special service of love.
They got up at once and went back to Jerusalem, where they found the eleven disciples gathered together with the others
and went on out to the entrance of the courtyard. Another servant woman saw him and said to the men there, He was with Jesus of Nazareth.
Jesus answered, What God wants you to do is to believe in the one he sent.
For there is no permanent city for us here on earth; we are looking for the city which is to come.
From then on Judas was looking for a good chance to hand Jesus over to them.
They will turn away from listening to the truth and give their attention to legends.
Meanwhile the whole meeting was in an uproar: some people were shouting one thing, others were shouting something else, because most of them did not even know why they had come together.
Remember to welcome strangers in your homes. There were some who did that and welcomed angels without knowing it.
If someone brings a lawsuit against you and takes you to court, settle the dispute while there is time, before you get to court. Once you are there, you will be turned over to the judge, who will hand you over to the police, and you will be put in jail.
Peter asked her, Tell me, was this the full amount you and your husband received for your property? Yes, she answered, the full amount.
A few days later there was a meeting of the believers, about a hundred and twenty in all, and Peter stood up to speak.
And in this way you will be sinning against Christ by sinning against other Christians and wounding their weak conscience.
And when you fast, do not put on a sad face as the hypocrites do. They neglect their appearance so that everyone will see that they are fasting. I assure you, they have already been paid in full.
Human anger does not achieve God's righteous purpose.
You did not choose me; I chose you and appointed you to go and bear much fruit, the kind of fruit that endures. And so the Father will give you whatever you ask of him in my name.
And he drove them out of the court.
When buried, it is a physical body; when raised, it will be a spiritual body. There is, of course, a physical body, so there has to be a spiritual body.
Jesus answered, If I were to honor myself, that honor would be worth nothing. The one who honors me is my Father -- the very one you say is your God.
I do not say this to condemn you; for, as I have said before, you are so dear to us that we are always together, whether we live or die.
At once the angel of the Lord struck Herod down, because he did not give honor to God. He was eaten by worms and died.
I can do nothing on my own authority; I judge only as God tells me, so my judgment is right, because I am not trying to do what I want, but only what he who sent me wants.
Then a great and mysterious sight appeared in the sky. There was a woman, whose dress was the sun and who had the moon under her feet and a crown of twelve stars on her head.
Jesus said to them, Come with me, and I will teach you to catch people.
Are you going to build it again in three days? they asked him. It has taken forty-six years to build this Temple!
They answered, We do not want to stone you because of any good deeds, but because of your blasphemy! You are only a man, but you are trying to make yourself God!
Then God's people will shine like the sun in their Father's Kingdom. Listen, then, if you have ears!
Suppose one of you has a hundred sheep and loses one of them -- what do you do? You leave the other ninety-nine sheep in the pasture and go looking for the one that got lost until you find it.
When the Judgment Day comes, many will say to me, Lord, Lord! In your name we spoke God's message, by your name we drove out many demons and performed many miracles!
People don't hide what they are doing if they want to be well known. Since you are doing these things, let the whole world know about you!
And when you ask, you do not receive it, because your motives are bad; you ask for things to use for your own pleasures.
I repeat: no one should think that I am a fool. But if you do, at least accept me as a fool, just so I will have a little to boast of.
Simon Peter and another disciple followed Jesus. That other disciple was well known to the High Priest, so he went with Jesus into the courtyard of the High Priest's house,
Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joseph were watching and saw where the body of Jesus was placed.
Then it goes out and brings along seven other spirits even worse than itself, and they come and live there. So when it is all over, that person is in worse shape than at the beginning. This is what will happen to the evil people of this day.
He hears us whenever we ask him; and since we know this is true, we know also that he gives us what we ask from him.
Sarah was like that; she obeyed Abraham and called him her master. You are now her daughters if you do good and are not afraid of anything.
No one can break into a strong man's house and take away his belongings unless he first ties up the strong man; then he can plunder his house.
The older brother was so angry that he would not go into the house; so his father came out and begged him to come in.
and from there they sailed back to Antioch, the place where they had been commended to the care of God's grace for the work they had now completed.
and took him first to Annas. He was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was High Priest that year.
It was faith that made Moses, when he had grown up, refuse to be called the son of the king's daughter.
But the man went away and began to spread the news everywhere. Indeed, he talked so much that Jesus could not go into a town publicly. Instead, he stayed out in lonely places, and people came to him from everywhere.
Love one another warmly as Christians, and be eager to show respect for one another.
After Jesus had said this prayer, he left with his disciples and went across Kidron Brook. There was a garden in that place, and Jesus and his disciples went in.
And Isaiah exclaims about Israel: Even if the people of Israel are as many as the grains of sand by the sea, yet only a few of them will be saved;
But the Spirit gave Stephen such wisdom that when he spoke, they could not refute him.
In the same way the men give up natural sexual relations with women and burn with passion for each other. Men do shameful things with each other, and as a result they bring upon themselves the punishment they deserve for their wrongdoing.
This is how you will be able to know whether it is God's Spirit: anyone who acknowledges that Jesus Christ came as a human being has the Spirit who comes from God.
For two years Paul lived in a place he rented for himself, and there he welcomed all who came to see him.
We went aboard a ship from Adramyttium, which was ready to leave for the seaports of the province of Asia, and we sailed away. Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica, was with us.
Whoever has the Son has this life; whoever does not have the Son of God does not have life.
Sin came into the world through one man, and his sin brought death with it. As a result, death has spread to the whole human race because everyone has sinned.
And now we sigh, so great is our desire that our home which comes from heaven should be put on over us;
While I was working among you, I was paid by other churches. I was robbing them, so to speak, in order to help you.
Whoever has the Spirit, however, is able to judge the value of everything, but no one is able to judge him.
For the scripture says, The first man, Adam, was created a living being; but the last Adam is the life-giving Spirit.
I will rescue you from the people of Israel and from the Gentiles to whom I will send you.
Jesus came to them and touched them. Get up, he said. Don't be afraid!
Some men joined him and believed, among whom was Dionysius, a member of the council; there was also a woman named Damaris, and some other people.
But just when the seven days were about to come to an end, some Jews from the province of Asia saw Paul in the Temple. They stirred up the whole crowd and grabbed Paul.
I will stay here in Ephesus until the day of Pentecost.
Why are you so frightened? Jesus answered. What little faith you have! Then he got up and ordered the winds and the waves to stop, and there was a great calm.
But the time is coming and is already here, when by the power of God's Spirit people will worship the Father as he really is, offering him the true worship that he wants.
Then the second angel blew his trumpet. Something that looked like a huge mountain on fire was thrown into the sea. A third of the sea was turned into blood,
This, however, is not the way it shall be among you. If one of you wants to be great, you must be the servant of the rest;
If people hear my message and do not obey it, I will not judge them. I came, not to judge the world, but to save it.
A man has no need to cover his head, because he reflects the image and glory of God. But woman reflects the glory of man;
The number of men who ate was four thousand, not counting the women and children.
I could, of course, put my trust in such things. If any of you think you can trust in external ceremonies, I have even more reason to feel that way.
The elders who do good work as leaders should be considered worthy of receiving double pay, especially those who work hard at preaching and teaching.
In the same way, after the supper he took the cup and said, This cup is God's new covenant, sealed with my blood. Whenever you drink it, do so in memory of me.
for the Lord will quickly settle his full account with the world.
I was blind because of the bright light, and so my companions took me by the hand and led me into Damascus.
How terrible for you who are full now; you will go hungry! How terrible for you who laugh now; you will mourn and weep!
The smoke of the burning incense went up with the prayers of God's people from the hands of the angel standing before God.
No, he answered, because as you gather the weeds you might pull up some of the wheat along with them.
Whoever does not love does not know God, for God is love.
You will agree, then, that I was not a burden to you. But someone will say that I was tricky, and trapped you with lies.
The Spirit is the guarantee that we shall receive what God has promised his people, and this assures us that God will give complete freedom to those who are his. Let us praise his glory!
But it is one and the same Spirit who does all this; as he wishes, he gives a different gift to each person.
Jesus was driving out a demon that could not talk; and when the demon went out, the man began to talk. The crowds were amazed,
If the people worshiping God had really been purified from their sins, they would not feel guilty of sin any more, and all sacrifices would stop.
So when I come to you, my friends, what use will I be to you if I speak in strange tongues? Not a bit, unless I bring you some revelation from God or some knowledge or some inspired message or some teaching.
Then Jesus said to his disciples, If any of you want to come with me, you must forget yourself, carry your cross, and follow me.
Their minds, indeed, were closed; and to this very day their minds are covered with the same veil as they read the books of the old covenant. The veil is removed only when a person is joined to Christ.
John answered, No one can have anything unless God gives it.
As they came down the mountain, Jesus ordered them, Don't tell anyone about this vision you have seen until the Son of Man has been raised from death.
He motioned with his hand for them to be quiet, and he explained to them how the Lord had brought him out of prison. Tell this to James and the rest of the believers, he said; then he left and went somewhere else.
Aeneas, Peter said to him, Jesus Christ makes you well. Get up and make your bed. At once Aeneas got up.
Some of the people standing there heard him and said, He is calling for Elijah!
You should think of us as Christ's servants, who have been put in charge of God's secret truths.
Jesus answered, It is written in your own Law that God said, You are gods.
where he stayed until Herod died. This was done to make come true what the Lord had said through the prophet, I called my Son out of Egypt.
How you will cry and gnash your teeth when you see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in the Kingdom of God, while you are thrown out!
For we know that Christ has been raised from death and will never die again -- death will no longer rule over him.
They noticed that some of his disciples were eating their food with hands that were ritually unclean -- that is, they had not washed them in the way the Pharisees said people should.
Words of thanksgiving and cursing pour out from the same mouth. My friends, this should not happen!
With a loud cry the Council members covered their ears with their hands. Then they all rushed at him at once,
But now you have been set free from sin and are the slaves of God. Your gain is a life fully dedicated to him, and the result is eternal life.
But Paul shook the snake off into the fire without being harmed at all.
When Pilate heard this, he asked, Is this man a Galilean?
At one time he was of no use to you, but now he is useful both to you and to me.
but Paul did not think it was right to take him, because he had not stayed with them to the end of their mission, but had turned back and left them in Pamphylia.
A young man named Eutychus was sitting in the window, and as Paul kept on talking, Eutychus got sleepier and sleepier, until he finally went sound asleep and fell from the third story to the ground. When they picked him up, he was dead.
There shall be no more night, and they will not need lamps or sunlight, because the Lord God will be their light, and they will rule as kings forever and ever.
He said to them, Throw your net out on the right side of the boat, and you will catch some. So they threw the net out and could not pull it back in, because they had caught so many fish.
Would any of you who are fathers give your son a stone when he asks for bread?
Take my yoke and put it on you, and learn from me, because I am gentle and humble in spirit; and you will find rest.
God raised the Lord from death, and he will also raise us by his power.
and singing the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb: Lord God Almighty, how great and wonderful are your deeds! King of the nations, how right and true are your ways!
He breaks off every branch in me that does not bear fruit, and he prunes every branch that does bear fruit, so that it will be clean and bear more fruit.
The news about this spread all over that part of the country.
Let me ask those of you who want to be subject to the Law: do you not hear what the Law says?
There you will stay, I tell you, until you pay the last penny of your fine.
Jesus saw him lying there, and he knew that the man had been sick for such a long time; so he asked him, Do you want to get well?
Yes, Lord! she answered. I do believe that you are the Messiah, the Son of God, who was to come into the world.
So the man who marries does well, but the one who doesn't marry does even better.
Then the one who sat on the cloud swung his sickle on the earth, and the earth's harvest was reaped.
At last he came to his senses and said, All my father's hired workers have more than they can eat, and here I am about to starve!
Every day Jesus taught in the Temple. The chief priests, the teachers of the Law, and the leaders of the people wanted to kill him,
Do not lie to one another, for you have put off the old self with its habits
instead of worshiping the immortal God, they worship images made to look like mortals or birds or animals or reptiles.
and in this way set free those who were slaves all their lives because of their fear of death.
The Kingdom of heaven is like this. Once there was a king who prepared a wedding feast for his son.
Keep on imitating me, my friends. Pay attention to those who follow the right example that we have set for you.
They tie onto people's backs loads that are heavy and hard to carry, yet they aren't willing even to lift a finger to help them carry those loads.
For false Messiahs and false prophets will appear; they will perform great miracles and wonders in order to deceive even God's chosen people, if possible.
It was a Cretan himself, one of their own prophets, who spoke the truth when he said, Cretans are always liars, wicked beasts, and lazy gluttons. For this reason you must rebuke them sharply, so that they may have a healthy faith
Epaphras, who is in prison with me for the sake of Christ Jesus, sends you his greetings,
And just as all people were made sinners as the result of the disobedience of one man, in the same way they will all be put right with God as the result of the obedience of the one man.
Jesus went on to say, There was once a man who had two sons.
Peter invited the men in and had them spend the night there. The next day he got ready and went with them; and some of the believers from Joppa went along with him.
What, then, was the purpose of the Law? It was added in order to show what wrongdoing is, and it was meant to last until the coming of Abraham's descendant, to whom the promise was made. The Law was handed down by angels, with a man acting as a go-between.
and in his name the message about repentance and the forgiveness of sins must be preached to all nations, beginning in Jerusalem.
So they left and made the tomb secure by putting a seal on the stone and leaving the guard on watch.
When Paul saw that some of the group were Sadducees and the others were Pharisees, he called out in the Council, Fellow Israelites! I am a Pharisee, the son of Pharisees. I am on trial here because of the hope I have that the dead will rise to life!
God revealed to these prophets that their work was not for their own benefit, but for yours, as they spoke about those things which you have now heard from the messengers who announced the Good News by the power of the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. These are things which even the angels would like to understand.
The testimony is this: God has given us eternal life, and this life has its source in his Son.
But the son of Paul's sister heard about the plot; so he went to the fort and told Paul.
We are sure that we live in union with God and that he lives in union with us, because he has given us his Spirit.
For no one is put right in God's sight by doing what the Law requires; what the Law does is to make us know that we have sinned.
Jesus heard them and answered, People who are well do not need a doctor, but only those who are sick.
As Saul was coming near the city of Damascus, suddenly a light from the sky flashed around him.
but for those whom God has called, both Jews and Gentiles, this message is Christ, who is the power of God and the wisdom of God.
And now I stand here to be tried because of the hope I have in the promise that God made to our ancestors --
He has brought down mighty kings from their thrones, and lifted up the lowly.
Between three and six o'clock in the morning Jesus came to the disciples, walking on the water.
They are God's people; he made them his children and revealed his glory to them; he made his covenants with them and gave them the Law; they have the true worship; they have received God's promises;
Pilate called together the chief priests, the leaders, and the people,
I can personally testify to his hard work for you and for the people in Laodicea and Hierapolis.
I only know that in every city the Holy Spirit has warned me that prison and troubles wait for me.
Sopater son of Pyrrhus, from Berea, went with him; so did Aristarchus and Secundus, from Thessalonica; Gaius, from Derbe; Tychicus and Trophimus, from the province of Asia; and Timothy.
In Joppa there was a woman named Tabitha, who was a believer. (Her name in Greek is Dorcas, meaning a deer.) She spent all her time doing good and helping the poor.
Do you gain anything if you win the whole world but lose your life? Of course not!
For the scripture says, Be happy, you childless woman! Shout and cry with joy, you who never felt the pains of childbirth! For the woman who was deserted will have more children than the woman whose husband never left her.
Jesus answered them, I will ask you just one question, and if you give me an answer, I will tell you what right I have to do these things. 
A man shouted from the crowd, Teacher! I beg you, look at my son -- my only son! 
But now I tell you: do not take revenge on someone who wrongs you. If anyone slaps you on the right cheek, let him slap your left cheek too.
He came to me, stood by me, and said, Brother Saul, see again! At that very moment I saw again and looked at him.
Our message is that God was making all human beings his friends through Christ. God did not keep an account of their sins, and he has given us the message which tells how he makes them his friends.
Don't worry about them! They are blind leaders of the blind; and when one blind man leads another, both fall into a ditch.
To him who by means of his power working in us is able to do so much more than we can ever ask for, or even think of:
The disciples saw this and were astounded. How did the fig tree dry up so quickly? they asked.
nor did I go to Jerusalem to see those who were apostles before me. Instead, I went at once to Arabia, and then I returned to Damascus.
They are filled with all kinds of wickedness, evil, greed, and vice; they are full of jealousy, murder, fighting, deceit, and malice. They gossip
The whole crowd cried out, Kill him! Set Barabbas free for us!
The gift of proclaiming God's message should be under the speaker's control,
Then the man left and told the Jewish authorities that it was Jesus who had healed him.
and when someone swears by heaven, he is swearing by God's throne and by him who sits on it.
All the people were amazed at the mighty power of God.The people were still marveling at everything Jesus was doing, when he said to his disciples,
If the whole body were just an eye, how could it hear? And if it were only an ear, how could it smell?
and be completely united with him. I no longer have a righteousness of my own, the kind that is gained by obeying the Law. I now have the righteousness that is given through faith in Christ, the righteousness that comes from God and is based on faith.
Be on your guard, then, so that you will not lose what we have worked for, but will receive your reward in full.
Or let these who are here tell what crime they found me guilty of when I stood before the Council --
In the sixth month of Elizabeth's pregnancy God sent the angel Gabriel to a town in Galilee named Nazareth.
Zacchaeus stood up and said to the Lord, Listen, sir! I will give half my belongings to the poor, and if I have cheated anyone, I will pay back four times as much.
Then the angel went away, and Cornelius called two of his house servants and a soldier, a religious man who was one of his personal attendants.
For you yourselves know very well that the Day of the Lord will come as a thief comes at night.
And Jesus concluded, Listen, then, if you have ears!
My friends: I myself feel sure that you are full of goodness, that you have all knowledge, and that you are able to teach one another.
from whom every family in heaven and on earth receives its true name.
Let the fig tree teach you a lesson. When its branches become green and tender and it starts putting out leaves, you know that summer is near.
So the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law asked Jesus, Why is it that your disciples do not follow the teaching handed down by our ancestors, but instead eat with ritually unclean hands?
and saw two angels there dressed in white, sitting where the body of Jesus had been, one at the head and the other at the feet.
According to his usual habit Paul went to the synagogue. There during three Sabbaths he held discussions with the people, quoting
You know about Stephanas and his family; they are the first Christian converts in Achaia and have given themselves to the service of God's people. I beg you, my friends,
From Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus -- To all God's people in Philippi who are in union with Christ Jesus, including the church leaders and helpers:
The next day the foot soldiers returned to the fort and left the horsemen to go on with him.
Be joyful always,
They traveled through the region of Phrygia and Galatia because the Holy Spirit did not let them preach the message in the province of Asia.
(For the pagans of this world are always concerned about all these things.) Your Father knows that you need these things.
But you have had the Holy Spirit poured out on you by Christ, and so all of you know the truth.
King Agrippa! I consider myself fortunate that today I am to defend myself before you from all the things these Jews accuse me of,
But they kept on shouting at the top of their voices that Jesus should be crucified, and finally their shouting succeeded.
There they crucified him; and they also crucified two other men, one on each side, with Jesus between them.
But all those things that I might count as profit I now reckon as loss for Christ's sake.
By means of the Holy Spirit you spoke through our ancestor David, your servant, when he said, Why were the Gentiles furious; why did people make their useless plots?
Don't I have the right to follow the example of the other apostles and the Lord's brothers and Peter, by taking a Christian wife with me on my trips?
And suppose your friend should answer from inside, Don't bother me! The door is already locked, and my children and I are in bed. I can't get up and give you anything.
but only the high priest goes into the inner tent, and he does so only once a year. He takes with him blood which he offers to God on behalf of himself and for the sins which the people have committed without knowing they were sinning.
after saying to him, Listen, don't tell anyone about this. But go straight to the priest and let him examine you; then in order to prove to everyone that you are cured, offer the sacrifice that Moses ordered.
My Father's glory is shown by your bearing much fruit; and in this way you become my disciples.
The blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a burnt calf are sprinkled on the people who are ritually unclean, and this purifies them by taking away their ritual impurity.
I was with you in the Temple every day, and you did not try to arrest me. But this is your hour to act, when the power of darkness rules.
Then the three disciples saw Moses and Elijah talking with Jesus.
They started to argue among themselves, What shall we say? If we say, From God, he will say, Why, then, did you not believe John?
They said to each other, Wasn't it like a fire burning in us when he talked to us on the road and explained the Scriptures to us?
Does this sound as if we were again boasting about ourselves? Could it be that, like some other people, we need letters of recommendation to you or from you?
Every good gift and every perfect present comes from heaven; it comes down from God, the Creator of the heavenly lights, who does not change or cause darkness by turning.
We do not want anyone to find fault with our work, so we try not to put obstacles in anyone's way.
So they went to John and told him, Teacher, you remember the man who was with you on the east side of the Jordan, the one you spoke about? Well, he is baptizing now, and everyone is going to him!
As it is, there are many parts but one body.
I beg you, then, eat some food; you need it in order to survive. Not even a hair of your heads will be lost.
I suppose, answered Simon, that it would be the one who was forgiven more. You are right, said Jesus.
For a long time the judge refused to act, but at last he said to himself, Even though I don't fear God or respect people,
The gatekeeper opens the gate for him; the sheep hear his voice as he calls his own sheep by name, and he leads them out.
Her parents were astounded, but Jesus commanded them not to tell anyone what had happened.
He has his winnowing shovel with him to thresh out all the grain. He will gather his wheat into his barn, but he will burn the chaff in a fire that never goes out.
Pilate went back out once more and said to the crowd, Look, I will bring him out here to you to let you see that I cannot find any reason to condemn him.
He came out, his hands and feet wrapped in grave cloths, and with a cloth around his face. Untie him, Jesus told them, and let him go.
If he was put right with God by the things he did, he would have something to boast about -- but not in God's sight.
As they approached Jerusalem, near the towns of Bethphage and Bethany, they came to the Mount of Olives. Jesus sent two of his disciples on ahead
When the man heard this, gloom spread over his face, and he went away sad, because he was very rich.
But the servant who does not know what his master wants, and yet does something for which he deserves a whipping, will be punished with a light whipping. Much is required from the person to whom much is given; much more is required from the person to whom much more is given.
He has remembered to show mercy to Abraham and to all his descendants forever!
Those false prophets speak about matters of the world, and the world listens to them because they belong to the world.
The crowds paid close attention to what Philip said, as they listened to him and saw the miracles that he performed.
Instead, new wine must be poured into fresh wineskins!
The two disciples heard him say this and went with Jesus.
There is one body and one Spirit, just as there is one hope to which God has called you.
Their answer was, Moses gave permission for a man to write a divorce notice and send his wife away.
Nor should you be called Leader, because your one and only leader is the Messiah.
that you have not failed to receive a single blessing, as you wait for our Lord Jesus Christ to be revealed.
And Jesus concluded, The Sabbath was made for the good of human beings; they were not made for the Sabbath.
Then the angel took the incense container, filled it with fire from the altar, and threw it on the earth. There were rumblings and peals of thunder, flashes of lightning, and an earthquake.
For some people from Chloe's family have told me quite plainly, my friends, that there are quarrels among you.
After spending two days there, Jesus left and went to Galilee.
After that they sat there and watched him.
What about you? he asked them. Who do you say I am? Peter answered, You are God's Messiah.
People of Israel! they shouted. Help! This is the man who goes everywhere teaching everyone against the people of Israel, the Law of Moses, and this Temple. And now he has even brought some Gentiles into the Temple and defiled this holy place!
Once again he prayed, and the sky poured out its rain and the earth produced its crops.
You did not welcome me with a kiss, but she has not stopped kissing my feet since I came.
I recommend to you our sister Phoebe, who serves the church at Cenchreae.
The next day he took out two silver coins and gave them to the innkeeper. Take care of him, he told the innkeeper, and when I come back this way, I will pay you whatever else you spend on him.
How evil and godless are the people of this day! Jesus exclaimed. You ask me for a miracle? No! The only miracle you will be given is the miracle of the prophet Jonah.
Jesus said also to the people, When you see a cloud coming up in the west, at once you say that it is going to rain -- and it does. 
and he began to teach them:
and at once got into a boat with his disciples and went to the district of Dalmanutha.
Even the angels, who are so much stronger and mightier than these false teachers, do not accuse them with insults in the presence of the Lord.
So he asked the twelve disciples, And you -- would you also like to leave?
People passing by shook their heads and hurled insults at Jesus:
When the dragon realized that he had been thrown down to the earth, he began to pursue the woman who had given birth to the boy.
But I tell the truth, and that is why you do not believe me.
Those who make themselves clean from all those evil things, will be used for special purposes, because they are dedicated and useful to their Master, ready to be used for every good deed.
Their bodies were taken to Shechem, where they were buried in the grave which Abraham had bought from the clan of Hamor for a sum of money.
where they began to accuse him: We caught this man misleading our people, telling them not to pay taxes to the Emperor and claiming that he himself is the Messiah, a king.
But when the man heard this, he became very sad, because he was very rich.
People passing by shook their heads and hurled insults at Jesus: Aha! You  were going to tear down the Temple and build it back up in three days!
What an unhappy man I am! Who will rescue me from this body that is taking me to death?
Because of such things God's anger will come upon those who do not obey him.
But Jesus would not let him. Instead, he told him, Go back home to your family and tell them how much the Lord has done for you and how kind he has been to you.
Then some Sadducees, who say that people will not rise from death, came to Jesus and said,
The seeds that fell on rocky ground stand for those who hear the message and receive it gladly. But it does not sink deep into them; they believe only for a while but when the time of testing comes, they fall away.
I wanted to know what they were accusing him of, so I took him down to their Council.
(:)
Jesus answered, Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
The crowd answered, Our Law tells us that the Messiah will live forever. How, then, can you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?
Jesus answered him, What do the Scriptures say? How do you interpret them?
Then the sixth angel poured out his bowl on the great Euphrates River. The river dried up, to provide a way for the kings who come from the east.
In Lystra there was a crippled man who had been lame from birth and had never been able to walk.
What about those eighteen people in Siloam who were killed when the tower fell on them? Do you suppose this proves that they were worse than all the other people living in Jerusalem?
because he was teaching his disciples: The Son of Man will be handed over to those who will kill him. Three days later, however, he will rise to life.
The Son was made greater than the angels, just as the name that God gave him is greater than theirs.
Then the fifth angel blew his trumpet. I saw a star which had fallen down to the earth, and it was given the key to the abyss.
There is nothing you can give to regain your life.
There is another difference: there were many of those other priests, because they died and could not continue their work.
Do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul; rather be afraid of God, who can destroy both body and soul in hell.
She did this for many days, until Paul became so upset that he turned around and said to the spirit, In the name of Jesus Christ I order you to come out of her! The spirit went out of her that very moment.
Do I say this because I don't love you? God knows I love you!
If you are being taught the Christian message, you should share all the good things you have with your teacher.
The Lord answered her, Martha, Martha! You are worried and troubled over so many things,
The next morning some Jews met together and made a plan. They took a vow that they would not eat or drink anything until they had killed Paul.
In his life on earth Jesus made his prayers and requests with loud cries and tears to God, who could save him from death. Because he was humble and devoted, God heard him.
For if I pray in this way, my spirit prays indeed, but my mind has no part in it.
Such people teach that it is wrong to marry and to eat certain foods. But God created those foods to be eaten, after a prayer of thanks, by those who are believers and have come to know the truth.
He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, Are you going to wash my feet, Lord?
So they set a date with Paul, and a large number of them came that day to the place where Paul was staying. From morning till night he explained to them his message about the Kingdom of God, and he tried to convince them about Jesus by quoting from the Law of Moses and the writings of the prophets.
They will be like angels and cannot die. They are the children of God, because they have risen from death.
So they started out in a boat by themselves to a lonely place.
I cried bitterly because no one could be found who was worthy to open the scroll or look inside it.
After two years had passed, Porcius Festus succeeded Felix as governor. Felix wanted to gain favor with the Jews so he left Paul in prison.
For the scripture says, I chose a valuable stone, which I am placing as the cornerstone in Zion; and whoever believes in him will never be disappointed.
So he called out, Father Abraham! Take pity on me, and send Lazarus to dip his finger in some water and cool off my tongue, because I am in great pain in this fire!
Then he turned to the woman and said to Simon, Do you see this woman? I came into your home, and you gave me no water for my feet, but she has washed my feet with her tears and dried them with her hair.
And the quality of each person's work will be seen when the Day of Christ exposes it. For on that Day fire will reveal everyone's work; the fire will test it and show its real quality.
Jesus and his disciples were now on the road going up to Jerusalem. Jesus was going ahead of the disciples, who were filled with alarm; the people who followed behind were afraid. Once again Jesus took the twelve disciples aside and spoke of the things that were going to happen to him.
We must not be guilty of sexual immorality, as some of them were -- and in one day twenty-three thousand of them fell dead.
An argument broke out among the disciples as to which one of them was the greatest.
Full of fear, the women bowed down to the ground, as the men said to them, Why are you looking among the dead for one who is alive?
As he scattered the seed in the field, some of it fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up.
But when they came to Jesus, they saw that he was already dead, so they did not break his legs.
I write you, then, not because you do not know the truth; instead, it is because you do know it, and you also know that no lie ever comes from the truth.
See what God did with this sadness of yours: how earnest it has made you, how eager to prove your innocence! Such indignation, such alarm, such feelings, such devotion, such readiness to punish wrongdoing! You have shown yourselves to be without fault in the whole matter.
For it was by hope that we were saved; but if we see what we hope for, then it is not really hope. For who of us hopes for something we see?
You say, I am rich and well off; I have all I need. But you do not know how miserable and pitiful you are! You are poor, naked, and blind.
But keep away from foolish and ignorant arguments; you know that they end up in quarrels.
According to our Law we cannot condemn people before hearing them and finding out what they have done.
I fell down at his feet to worship him, but he said to me, Don't do it! I am a servant together with you and with other believers, all those who hold to the truth that Jesus revealed. Worship God! For the truth that Jesus revealed is what inspires the prophets.
then he brought it on a plate and gave it to the girl, who gave it to her mother.
When they heard this, they were amazed; and they left him and went away.
We have courage in God's presence, because we are sure that he hears us if we ask him for anything that is according to his will.
When they came to the place called The Skull, they crucified Jesus there, and the two criminals, one on his right and the other on his left.
Do not hold on to me, Jesus told her, because I have not yet gone back up to the Father. But go to my brothers and tell them that I am returning to him who is my Father and their Father, my God and their God.
they will be treacherous, reckless, and swollen with pride; they will love pleasure rather than God;
For forty days after his death he appeared to them many times in ways that proved beyond doubt that he was alive. They saw him, and he talked with them about the Kingdom of God.
When day came, the sailors did not recognize the coast, but they noticed a bay with a beach and decided that, if possible, they would run the ship aground there.
How terrible for you Pharisees! You love the reserved seats in the synagogues and to be greeted with respect in the marketplaces.
The people were all amazed and said to one another, What kind of words are these? With authority and power this  man gives orders to the evil spirits, and they come out!
They even tried to stop us from preaching to the Gentiles the message that would bring them salvation. In this way they have brought to completion all the sins they have always committed. And now God's anger has at last come down on them!
This is a true saying, to be completely accepted and believed.
The beast forced all the people, small and great, rich and poor, slave and free, to have a mark placed on their right hands or on their foreheads.
He also says, I will put my trust in God. And he also says, Here I am with the children that God has given me.
The commandments, Do not commit adultery; do not commit murder; do not steal; do not desire what belongs to someone else -- all these, and any others besides, are summed up in the one command, Love your neighbor as you love yourself.
In the first place, I have been told that there are opposing groups in your meetings; and this I believe is partly true.
They answered, When you sit on your throne in your glorious Kingdom, we want you to let us sit with you, one at your right and one at your left.
So I will have him whipped and let him go.
Instead, be holy in all that you do, just as God who called you is holy.
[They returned and told the others, but these would not believe it.]
eat no food that has been offered to idols; eat no blood; eat no animal that has been strangled; and keep yourselves from sexual immorality. You will do well if you take care not to do these things. With our best wishes.
If people have escaped from the corrupting forces of the world through their knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and then are again caught and conquered by them, such people are in worse condition at the end than they were at the beginning.
Jesus asked him, What is your name? My name is Mob, he answered -- because many demons had gone into him.
On his way home his servants met him with the news, Your boy is going to live!
In all things you yourself must be an example of good behavior. Be sincere and serious in your teaching.
First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because the whole world is hearing about your faith.
But Jesus did not say a word to her. His disciples came to him and begged him, Send her away! She is following us and making all this noise!
Hold firmly to the true words that I taught you, as the example for you to follow, and remain in the faith and love that are ours in union with Christ Jesus.
When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had been buried four days before.
Not long afterward another large crowd came together. When the  people had nothing left to eat, Jesus called the disciples to him and said,
By no means! If God is not just, how can he judge the world?
Then he walked over and touched the coffin, and the men carrying it stopped. Jesus said, Young man! Get up, I tell you!
This happened in order to make come true what the prophet had said:
When Jesus finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went to the territory of Judea on the other side of the Jordan River.
As Jesus taught in the Temple, he said in a loud voice, Do you really know me and know where I am from? I have not come on my own authority. He who sent me, however, is truthful. You do not know him,
Considering the present distress, I think it is better for a man to stay as he is.
Those who speak in strange tongues do not speak to others but to God, because no one understands them. They are speaking secret truths by the power of the Spirit.
While Apollos was in Corinth, Paul traveled through the interior of the province and arrived in Ephesus. There he found some disciples
So the Council warned them even more strongly and then set them free. They saw that it was impossible to punish them, because the people were all praising God for what had happened.
I was angry and made a solemn promise: They will never enter the land where I would have given them rest!
But they shouted back, Crucify him! Crucify him!
and to shine from heaven on all those who live in the dark shadow of death, to guide our steps into the path of peace.
Who were the people who heard God's voice and rebelled against him? All those who were led out of Egypt by Moses.
Did all your experience mean nothing at all? Surely it meant something!
After that, Judas the Galilean appeared during the time of the census; he drew a crowd after him, but he also was killed, and all his followers were scattered.
They won the victory over him by the blood of the Lamb and by the truth which they proclaimed; and they were willing to give up their lives and die.
and said to them, Whoever welcomes this child in my name, welcomes me; and whoever welcomes me, also welcomes the one who sent me. For the one who is least among you all is the greatest.
Jesus said to her, My daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be healed of your trouble.
I was so sure of all this that I made plans at first to visit you, in order that you might be blessed twice.
Master, Simon answered, we worked hard all night long and caught nothing. But if you say so, I will let down the nets.
My fellow Israelites, descendants of Abraham, and all Gentiles here who worship God: it is to us that this message of salvation has been sent!
Jesus answered, I am telling you the truth: no one can see the Kingdom of God without being born again.
Then the King will say to the people on his right, Come, you that are blessed by my Father! Come and possess the kingdom which has been prepared for you ever since the creation of the world.
Do not be afraid, little flock, for your Father is pleased to give you the Kingdom.
And after you have proved your complete loyalty, we will be ready to punish any act of disloyalty.
But in this letter I have been quite bold about certain subjects of which I have reminded you. I have been bold because of the privilege God has given me
This is how the judgment works: the light has come into the world, but people love the darkness rather than the light, because their deeds are evil.
As the man held on to Peter and John in Solomon's Porch, as it was called, the people were amazed and ran to them.
If you have ears, then, listen to what the Spirit says to the churches!
To God be the glory forever and ever! Amen.
I repeat: it is much harder for a rich person to enter the Kingdom of God than for a camel to go through the eye of a needle.
For if the dead are not raised, neither has Christ been raised.
Listen, he told them, we are going up to Jerusalem where the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and the teachers of the Law. They will condemn him to death and then hand him over to the Gentiles,
In this way the teaching you pass on to others cancels out the word of God. And there are many other things like this that you do.
But if Christ lives in you, the Spirit is life for you because you have been put right with God, even though your bodies are going to die because of sin.
For it is better to suffer for doing good, if this should be God's will, than for doing evil.
What human nature does is quite plain. It shows itself in immoral, filthy, and indecent actions;
They went all the way across the island to Paphos, where they met a certain magician named Bar-Jesus, a Jew who claimed to be a prophet.
Do any of you think you are religious? If you do not control your tongue, your religion is worthless and you deceive yourself.
They were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to talk in other languages, as the Spirit enabled them to speak.
One of the criminals hanging there hurled insults at him: Aren't you the Messiah? Save yourself and us!
Death gets its power to hurt from sin, and sin gets its power from the Law.
everyone has sinned and is far away from God's saving presence.
Someone else said, I will follow you, sir; but first let me go and say good-bye to my family.
You will always have poor people with you, and any time you want to, you can help them. But you will not always have me.
For those who make themselves great will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be made great.
Then their eyes were opened and they recognized him, but he disappeared from their sight.
God will show more mercy on the Judgment Day to Tyre and Sidon than to you.
I have come with my Father's authority, but you have not received me; when, however, someone comes with his own authority, you will receive him.
The people who heard him were amazed at the way he taught, for he wasn't like the teachers of the Law; instead, he taught with authority.
All of us who are spiritually mature should have this same attitude. But if some of you have a different attitude, God will make this clear to you.
This means that no one can boast in God's presence.
The child grew and developed in body and spirit. He lived in the desert until the day when he appeared publicly to the people of Israel.
But if any do not take care of their relatives, especially the members of their own family, they have denied the faith and are worse than an unbeliever.
At last a king who did not know about Joseph began to rule in Egypt.
I do this in order that they may be filled with courage and may be drawn together in love, and so have the full wealth of assurance which true understanding brings. In this way they will know God's secret, which is Christ himself.
For after what has happened today, there is the danger that we will be accused of a riot. There is no excuse for all this uproar, and we would not be able to give a good reason for it.
And if someone takes you to court to sue you for your shirt, let him have your coat as well.
Be careful not to let yourselves become occupied with too much feasting and drinking and with the worries of this life, or that Day may suddenly catch you
Then they willingly took him into the boat, and immediately the boat reached land at the place they were heading for.
I know that you are willing to help, and I have boasted of you to the people in Macedonia. The believers in Achaia, I said, have been ready to help since last year. Your eagerness has stirred up most of them.
On the Sabbath he began to teach in the synagogue. Many people were there; and when they heard him, they were all amazed. Where did he get all this? they asked. What wisdom is this that has been given him? How does he perform miracles?
Such teaching is like an open sore that eats away the flesh. Two men who have taught such things are Hymenaeus and Philetus.
Then they brought in some men to tell lies about him. This man, they said, is always talking against our sacred Temple and the Law of Moses.
Then some Gentiles and Jews, together with their leaders, decided to mistreat the apostles and stone them.
I have given her time to repent of her sins, but she does not want to turn from her immorality.
The merchants say to her, All the good things you longed to own have disappeared, and all your wealth and glamor are gone, and you will never find them again!
So when he was raised from death, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the scripture and what Jesus had said.
Everyone worshiped the dragon because he had given his authority to the beast. They worshiped the beast also, saying, Who is like the beast? Who can fight against it?
And the report about Jesus spread everywhere in that region.
and the rich Christians must be glad when God brings them down. For the rich will pass away like the flower of a wild plant.
My dear friends, this command I am writing you is not new; it is the old command, the one you have had from the very beginning. The old command is the message you have already heard.
There was no need for anyone to tell him about them, because he himself knew what was in their hearts.
And Jesus said to them, Neither will I tell you, then, by what right I do these things.
That is why I am sending him to you, in order to cheer you up by telling you how all of us are getting along.
In the case of our human fathers, they punished us and we respected them. How much more, then, should we submit to our spiritual Father and live!
The priest of the god Zeus, whose temple stood just outside the town, brought bulls and flowers to the gate, for he and the crowds wanted to offer sacrifice to the apostles.
I am telling you the truth: those who believe in me will do what I do -- yes, they will do even greater things, because I am going to the Father.
Greetings also to Andronicus and Junia, fellow Jews who were in prison with me; they are well known among the apostles, and they became Christians before I did.
I have the strength to face all conditions by the power that Christ gives me.
You call me Teacher and Lord, and it is right that you do so, because that is what I am.
The scripture says, Abraham believed God, and because of his faith God accepted him as righteous.
And Jesus concluded, The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.
So John said to all of them, I baptize you with water, but someone is coming who is much greater than I am. I am not good enough even to untie his sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.
by our message of truth, and by the power of God. We have righteousness as our weapon, both to attack and to defend ourselves.
Someone who is in the field must not go back to the house for a cloak.
That very same hour she arrived and gave thanks to God and spoke about the child to all who were waiting for God to set Jerusalem free.
although saddened, we are always glad; we seem poor, but we make many people rich; we seem to have nothing, yet we really possess everything.
The commander went over to Paul, arrested him, and ordered him to be bound with two chains. Then he asked, Who is this man, and what has he done?
The servant who had received five thousand coins went at once and invested his money and earned another five thousand.
He left them, got back into the boat, and started across to the other side of the lake.
Then I remembered what the Lord had said: John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.
So when Joseph woke up, he married Mary, as the angel of the Lord had told him to.
The soldiers also made fun of him: they came up to him and offered him cheap wine,
Many people from the province of Judea and the city of Jerusalem went out to hear John. They confessed their sins, and he baptized them in the Jordan River.
Accept one another, then, for the glory of God, as Christ has accepted you.
The chief priests picked up the coins and said, This is blood money, and it is against our Law to put it in the Temple treasury.
Do you not know that we shall judge the angels? How much more, then, the things of this life!
and everyone in the city, from all classes of society, paid close attention to him. He is that power of God known as The Great Power, they said.
Jesus said to them, If God really were your Father, you would love me, because I came from God and now I am here. I did not come on my own authority, but he sent me.
It is clear that God gave those Gentiles the same gift that he gave us when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ; who was I, then, to try to stop God!
The same thing happened to the second brother, to the third, and finally to all seven.
We left by ship from Troas and sailed straight across to Samothrace, and the next day to Neapolis.
For he said to Moses, I will have mercy on anyone I wish; I will take pity on anyone I wish.
All this is done by God, who through Christ changed us from enemies into his friends and gave us the task of making others his friends also.
I want you to know, my friends, that the things that have happened to me have really helped the progress of the gospel.
So then, there were fourteen generations from Abraham to David, and fourteen from David to the exile in Babylon, and fourteen from then to the birth of the Messiah.
For what our human nature wants is opposed to what the Spirit wants, and what the Spirit wants is opposed to what our human nature wants. These two are enemies, and this means that you cannot do what you want to do.
There were three gates on each side: three on the east, three on the south, three on the north, and three on the west.
At every Passover Festival the Roman governor was in the habit of setting free any one prisoner the crowd asked for.
When people criticize me, this is how I defend myself:
King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know that you do!
Do not let evil defeat you; instead, conquer evil with good.
an instructor for the foolish, and a teacher for the ignorant. You are certain that in the Law you have the full content of knowledge and of truth.
Hear what God says: When the time came for me to show you favor, I heard you; when the day arrived for me to save you, I helped you. Listen! This is the hour to receive God's favor; today is the day to be saved!
Someone is shouting in the desert, Get the road ready for the Lord; make a straight path for him to travel!
For the scripture says, Do not muzzle an ox when you are using it to thresh grain and Workers should be given their pay.
But we do see Jesus, who for a little while was made lower than the angels, so that through God's grace he should die for everyone. We see him now crowned with glory and honor because of the death he suffered.
You are so rich in all you have: in faith, speech, and knowledge, in your eagerness to help and in your love for us. And so we want you to be generous also in this service of love.
But after I am raised to life, I will go to Galilee ahead of you.
It began as the prophet Isaiah had written: God said, I will send my messenger ahead of you to open the way for you.
For rulers are not to be feared by those who do good, but by those who do evil. Would you like to be unafraid of those in authority? Then do what is good, and they will praise you,
God poured out the Holy Spirit abundantly on us through Jesus Christ our Savior,
so that you may be innocent and pure as God's perfect children, who live in a world of corrupt and sinful people. You must shine among them like stars lighting up the sky,
But we wait for what God has promised: new heavens and a new earth, where righteousness will be at home.
They started to argue among themselves: What shall we say? If we  answer, From God, he will say, Why, then, did you not believe John?
By the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ I appeal to all of you, my friends, to agree in what you say, so that there will be no divisions among you. Be completely united, with only one thought and one purpose.
All who are with me send you greetings. Give our greetings to our friends in the faith. God's grace be with you all.
You will indeed drink from my cup, Jesus told them, but I do not have the right to choose who will sit at my right and my left. These places belong to those for whom my Father has prepared them.
They were annoyed because the two apostles were teaching the people that Jesus had risen from death, which proved that the dead will rise to life.
But I have told you this, so that when the time comes for them to do these things, you will remember what I told you.I did not tell you these things at the beginning, for I was with you.
For this reason the Wisdom of God said, I will send them prophets and messengers; they will kill some of them and persecute others.
John answered by quoting the prophet Isaiah: I am the voice of someone shouting in the desert: Make a straight path for the Lord to travel!
It was also said, Anyone who divorces his wife must give her a written notice of divorce.
My Christian friends, who also have been called by God! Think of Jesus, whom God sent to be the High Priest of the faith we profess.
Whoever wants to serve me must follow me, so that my servant will be with me where I am. And my Father will honor anyone who serves me.
As the people crowded around Jesus, he went on to say, How evil are the people of this day! They ask for a miracle, but none will be given them except the miracle of Jonah.
When Jesus was twelve years old, they went to the festival as usual.
They were burned by the fierce heat, and they cursed the name of God, who has authority over these plagues. But they would not turn from their sins and praise his greatness.
My dear friend, you are so faithful in the work you do for other Christians, even when they are strangers.
Peter declared, Never at any time will you wash my feet! If I do not wash your feet, Jesus answered, you will no longer be my disciple.
They gave him a piece of cooked fish,
We heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will tear down the Temple and change all the customs which have come down to us from Moses!
Last of all, the woman died.
Jesus answered, I have already told you, but you would not believe me. The deeds I do by my Father's authority speak on my behalf;
It was not only his coming that cheered us, but also his report of how you encouraged him. He told us how much you want to see me, how sorry you are, how ready you are to defend me; and so I am even happier now.
My righteous people, however, will believe and live; but if any of them turns back, I will not be pleased with them.
Last of all he sent his son to them. Surely they will respect my son, he said.
Christ is the visible likeness of the invisible God. He is the first-born Son, superior to all created things.
He is also the father of those who are circumcised, that is, of those who, in addition to being circumcised, also live the same life of faith that our father Abraham lived before he was circumcised.
in order to keep Satan from getting the upper hand over us; for we know what his plans are.
When they heard him speaking to them in Hebrew, they became even quieter; and Paul went on:
When the voice stopped, there was Jesus all alone. The disciples kept quiet about all this and told no one at that time anything they had seen.
Since what I do is what I don't want to do, this shows that I agree that the Law is right.
In the same way, though we are many, we are one body in union with Christ, and we are all joined to each other as different parts of one body.
The Father and I are one.
While I am in the world, I am the light for the world.
Consider the people of Israel; those who eat what is offered in sacrifice share in the altar's service to God.
A week later, when the time came for the baby to be circumcised, he was named Jesus, the name which the angel had given him before he had been conceived.
But one night Saul's followers took him and let him down through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.
When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
But if we confess our sins to God, he will keep his promise and do what is right: he will forgive us our sins and purify us from all our wrongdoing.
When John's disciples heard about this, they came and got his body, and buried it.
Because the Lord corrects everyone he loves, and punishes everyone he accepts as a child.
God is the one who has prepared us for this change, and he gave us his Spirit as the guarantee of all that he has in store for us.
I sent them into the world, just as you sent me into the world.
Jesus said to them, Take care; be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
I don't have a husband, she answered. Jesus replied, You are right when you say you don't have a husband.
and his clothes became shining white -- whiter than anyone in the world could wash them.
You must turn away from evil and do good; you must strive for peace with all your heart.
All I have is yours, and all you have is mine; and my glory is shown through them.
Now, what do you think? There was once a man who had two sons. He went to the older one and said, Son, go and work in the vineyard today.
Thomas answered him, My Lord and my God!
And this is how all Israel will be saved. As the scripture says, The Savior will come from Zion and remove all wickedness from the descendants of Jacob.
Whatever is hidden away will be brought out into the open, and whatever is covered up will be uncovered.
the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,
People will faint from fear as they wait for what is coming over the whole earth, for the powers in space will be driven from their courses.
And not to mention other things, every day I am under the pressure of my concern for all the churches.
But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait for it with patience.
You were chosen according to the purpose of God the Father and were made a holy people by his Spirit, to obey Jesus Christ and be purified by his blood. May grace and peace be yours in full measure.
Let me put it this way: each one of you says something different. One says, I follow Paul; another, I follow Apollos; another, I follow Peter; and another, I follow Christ.
You are crazy! they told her. But she insisted that it was true. So they answered, It is his angel.
But the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law rejected God's purpose for themselves and refused to be baptized by John.
Now, concerning what you wrote about the gifts from the Holy Spirit. I want you to know the truth about them, my friends.
Erastus stayed in Corinth, and I left Trophimus in Miletus, because he was sick.
The people in the towns where Jesus had performed most of his miracles did not turn from their sins, so he reproached those towns.
Early next morning, as they walked along the road, they saw the fig tree. It was dead all the way down to its roots.
When he arrived in Galilee, the people there welcomed him, because they had gone to the Passover Festival in Jerusalem and had seen everything that he had done during the festival.
Jesus answered, Those who drink this water will get thirsty again,
If the world hates you, just remember that it has hated me first.
But from the time of Adam to the time of Moses, death ruled over all human beings, even over those who did not sin in the same way that Adam did when he disobeyed God's command. Adam was a figure of the one who was to come.
Now, on the day when the dead rise to life, whose wife will she be? All seven of them had married her.
So then, dear friends, as you always obeyed me when I was with you, it is even more important that you obey me now while I am away from you. Keep on working with fear and trembling to complete your salvation,
No one has ever seen God. The only Son, who is the same as God and is at the Father's side, he has made him known.
For God said, Respect your father and your mother, and If you curse your father or your mother, you are to be put to death.
The young men came in, wrapped up his body, carried him out, and buried him.
If that is true, it means that Christ was not raised;
Simon Peter answered, Lord, do not wash only my feet, then! Wash my hands and head, too!
Finally, our friends, pray for us that the Lord's message may continue to spread rapidly and be received with honor, just as it was among you.
So Joseph took it, wrapped it in a new linen sheet,
A person is born physically of human parents, but is born spiritually of the Spirit.
The Lord's power was with them, and a great number of people believed and turned to the Lord.
And now the heathen are surprised when you do not join them in the same wild and reckless living, and so they insult you.
Here is the clear difference between God's children and the Devil's children: those who do not do what is right or do not love others are not God's children.
Many of the Samaritans in that town believed in Jesus because the woman had said, He told me everything I have ever done.
I write this to you, not because I want to make you feel ashamed, but to instruct you as my own dear children.
But Jesus said, Someone touched me, for I knew it when power went out of me.
For the body itself is not made up of only one part, but of many parts.
We felt that the death sentence had been passed on us. But this happened so that we should rely, not on ourselves, but only on God, who raises the dead.
Above the Box were the winged creatures representing God's presence, with their wings spread over the place where sins were forgiven. But now is not the time to explain everything in detail.
For some time John the Baptist had told Herod, It isn't right for you to be married to Herodias!
Peter followed from a distance, as far as the courtyard of the High Priest's house. He went into the courtyard and sat down with the guards to see how it would all come out.
And so, Your Excellency, because I have carefully studied all these matters from their beginning, I thought it would be good to write an orderly account for you.
when we are insulted, we answer back with kind words. We are no more than this world's garbage; we are the scum of the earth to this very moment!
But God said to him, You fool! This very night you will have to give up your  life; then who will get all these things you have kept for yourself?
Jesus knew their thoughts and said to them, Why do you think such things?
Jesus looked around and saw rich people dropping their gifts in the Temple treasury,
Jesus then told his disciples to make all the people divide into groups and sit down on the green grass.
If such matters come up, are you going to take them to be settled by people who have no standing in the church?
so that what the prophet Isaiah had said might come true: Lord, who believed the message we told? To whom did the Lord reveal his power?
and all will openly proclaim that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
Many people spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches in the field and spread them on the road.
I begged Titus to go, and I sent the other believer with him. Would you say that Titus took advantage of you? Do not he and I act from the very same motives and behave in the same way?
And the dragon stood on the seashore. (-)Then I saw a beast coming up out of the sea. It had ten horns and seven heads; on each of its horns there was a crown, and on each of its heads there was a name that was insulting to God.
(:)
The governor read the letter and asked Paul what province he was from. When he found out that he was from Cilicia,
Who, then, is the liar? It is those who say that Jesus is not the Messiah. Such people are the Enemy of Christ -- they reject both the Father and the Son.
On the first day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread the disciples came to Jesus and asked him, Where do you want us to get the Passover meal ready for you?
I found out that he had not done a thing for which he deserved to die or be put in prison; the accusation against him had to do with questions about their own law.
Then Jesus spoke up and said to them, Did you have to come with swords and clubs to capture me, as though I were an outlaw?
They came to a place called Golgotha, which means, The Place of the Skull.
bless those who curse you, and pray for those who mistreat you.
You have come to Jesus, who arranged the new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that promises much better things than does the blood of Abel.
Jesus answered, There was once a man who was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho when robbers  attacked him, stripped him, and beat him up, leaving him half dead.
If it seems worthwhile for me to go, then they can go along with me.
You know of the great event that took place throughout the land of Israel, beginning in Galilee after John preached his message of baptism.
Those other people show a deep interest in you, but their intentions are not good. All they want is to separate you from me, so that you will have the same interest in them as they have in you.
No one knows, however, when that day and hour will come -- neither the angels in heaven nor the Son; the Father alone knows.
I will forgive their sins and will no longer remember their wrongs.
Then war broke out in heaven. Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, who fought back with his angels;
The man from whom the demons had gone out begged Jesus, Let me go with you. But Jesus sent him away, saying,
-And if your foot makes you lose your faith, cut it off! It is better for you to enter life without a foot than to keep both feet and be thrown into hell.
The Pharisee stood apart by himself and prayed, I thank you, God, that I am not greedy, dishonest, or an adulterer, like everybody else. I thank you that I am not like that tax collector over there.
Don't I have the right to be given food and drink for my work?
Do you already have everything you need? Are you already rich? Have you become kings, even though we are not? Well, I wish you really were kings, so that we could be kings together with you.
and announce that the time has come when the Lord will save his people.
We did not try to get praise from anyone, either from you or from others,
Then we said good-bye to one another, and we went on board the ship while they went back home.
The words once more plainly show that the created things will be shaken and removed, so that the things that cannot be shaken will remain.
After they had been there several days, Festus explained Paul's situation to the king: There is a man here who was left a prisoner by Felix;
I write you this brief letter with the help of Silas, whom I regard as a faithful Christian. I want to encourage you and give my testimony that this is the true grace of God. Stand firm in it.
but if your eyes are no good, your body will be in darkness. So if the light in you is darkness, how terribly dark it will be!
The Mysterious Wickedness is already at work, but what is going to happen will not happen until the one who holds it back is taken out of the way.
I assure you that people can be forgiven all their sins and all the evil things they may say.
Everyone was amazed. What kind of man is this? they said. Even the winds and the waves obey him!
Jesus looked at his disciples and said, Happy are you poor; the Kingdom of God is yours! 
The Lord be with your spirit. God's grace be with you all.
and among them there was what looked like a human being, wearing a robe that reached to his feet, and a gold band around his chest.
And the Holy Spirit also gives us his witness. First he says,
So they left the crowd; the disciples got into the boat in which Jesus was already sitting, and they took him with them. Other boats were there too.
The group presented them to the apostles, who prayed and placed their hands on them.
Command them to do good, to be rich in good works, to be generous and ready to share with others.
On the second visit Joseph made himself known to his brothers, and the king of Egypt came to know about Joseph's family.
I am writing this to you so that you may know that you have eternal life -- you that believe in the Son of God.
he jumped up, stood on his feet, and started walking around. Then he went into the Temple with them, walking and jumping and praising God.
Sin must not be your master; for you do not live under law but under God's grace.
So he held discussions in the synagogue with the Jews and with the Gentiles who worshiped God, and also in the public square every day with the people who happened to come by.
Then I looked, and there was a white cloud, and sitting on the cloud was what looked like a human being, with a crown of gold on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
But since there are so many who boast for merely human reasons, I will do the same.
When we heard this, we and the others there begged Paul not to go to Jerusalem.
But there was no one in heaven or on earth or in the world below who could open the scroll and look inside it.
But some Jews from the province of Asia were there; they themselves ought to come before you and make their accusations if they have anything against me.
So he looked at them, expecting to get something from them.
Do not deny yourselves to each other, unless you first agree to do so for a while in order to spend your time in prayer; but then resume normal marital relations. In this way you will be kept from giving in to Satan's temptation because of your lack of self-control.
The Jewish high priest goes into the Most Holy Place every year with the blood of an animal. But Christ did not go in to offer himself many times,
Standing close to Jesus' cross were his mother, his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.
They did not find him, so they went back to Jerusalem looking for him.
There was a large herd of pigs near by, feeding on a hillside.
John was the man the prophet Isaiah was talking about when he said, Someone is shouting in the desert, Prepare a road for the Lord; make a straight path for him to travel!
There were flashes of lightning, rumblings and peals of thunder, and a terrible earthquake. There has never been such an earthquake since the creation of human beings; this was the worst earthquake of all!
For where two or three come together in my name, I am there with them.
Paul and Barnabas preached the Good News in Derbe and won many disciples. Then they went back to Lystra, to Iconium, and on to Antioch in Pisidia.
Another one said, I have just gotten married, and for that reason I cannot come.
For this reason I remind you to keep alive the gift that God gave you when I laid my hands on you.
My friends, I must speak to you plainly about our famous ancestor King David. He died and was buried, and his grave is here with us to this very day.
Jesus said to her, Didn't I tell you that you would see God's glory if you believed?
And so wives must submit themselves completely to their husbands just as the church submits itself to Christ.
(He said this because Jesus was saying, Evil spirit, come out of this man!)
Tell us, is it against our Law for us to pay taxes to the Roman Emperor, or not?
Zechariah said to the angel, How shall I know if this is so? I am an old man, and my wife is old also.
But now you are proud, and you boast; all such boasting is wrong.
They rose up, dragged Jesus out of town, and took him to the top of the hill on which their town was built. They meant to throw him over the cliff,
(His disciples had gone into town to buy food.)
And Jesus explained to them what was said about himself in all the Scriptures, beginning with the books of Moses and the writings of all the prophets.
Mary remembered all these things and thought deeply about them.
He said to them, There is a large harvest, but few workers to gather it in. Pray to the owner of the harvest that he will send out workers to gather in his harvest.
May God the Father and Jesus Christ, the Father's Son, give us grace, mercy, and peace; may they be ours in truth and love.
As they came down the mountain, Jesus ordered them, Don't tell anyone what you have seen, until the Son of Man has risen from death. 
They have left the straight path and have lost their way; they have followed the path taken by Balaam son of Beor, who loved the money he would get for doing wrong
Herod was very pleased when he saw Jesus, because he had heard about him and had been wanting to see him for a long time. He was hoping to see Jesus perform some miracle.
Then she gave birth to a son, who will rule over all nations with an iron rod. But the child was snatched away and taken to God and his throne.
But the solid foundation that God has laid cannot be shaken; and on it are written these words: The Lord knows those who are his and Those who say that they belong to the Lord must turn away from wrongdoing.
because they had not understood the real meaning of the feeding of the five thousand; their minds could not grasp it.
Jesus said to the fig tree, No one shall ever eat figs from you again! And his disciples heard him.
How can this be? asked Nicodemus.
The Jewish authorities said among themselves, Where is he about to go so that we shall not find him? Will he go to the Greek cities where our people live, and teach the Greeks?
In the same way, Christ did not take upon himself the honor of being a high priest. Instead, God said to him, You are my Son; today I have become your Father.
As for us, friends, when we were separated from you for a little while -- not in our thoughts, of course, but only in body -- how we missed you and how hard we tried to see you again!
His hair was white as wool, or as snow, and his eyes blazed like fire;
I am sure of this, and so I know that I will stay. I will stay on with you all, to add to your progress and joy in the faith,
The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our ancestors, has given divine glory to his Servant Jesus. But you handed him over to the authorities, and you rejected him in Pilate's presence, even after Pilate had decided to set him free.
In this way you will win the respect of those who are not believers, and you will not have to depend on anyone for what you need.
After the thousand years are over, Satan will be set loose from his prison,
But not a single hair from your heads will be lost.
Write, then, the things you see, both the things that are now and the things that will happen afterward.
And the scripture came true that said, Abraham believed God, and because of his faith God accepted him as righteous. And so Abraham was called God's friend.
If someone who is peace-loving lives there, let your greeting of peace remain on that person; if not, take back your greeting of peace.
And those who belong to Christ Jesus have put to death their human nature with all its passions and desires.
He knew very well that the Jewish authorities had handed Jesus over to him because they were jealous.
For what is life? To me, it is Christ. Death, then, will bring more.
the very thing that the twelve tribes of our people hope to receive, as they worship God day and night. And it is because of this hope, Your Majesty, that I am being accused by these Jews!
Anyone who is not for me is really against me; anyone who does not help me gather is really scattering.
The sun has its own beauty, the moon another beauty, and the stars a different beauty; and even among stars there are different kinds of beauty.
Everything that belongs to the world -- what the sinful self desires, what people see and want, and everything in this world that people are so proud of -- none of this comes from the Father; it all comes from the world.
Now we can give thanks to our God for you. We thank him for the joy we have in his presence because of you.
The Pharisees said to him, Now you are testifying on your own behalf; what you say proves nothing.
Six days later Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John, and led them up a high mountain, where they were alone. As they looked on, a change came over Jesus,
As the soldiers were about to take Paul into the fort, he spoke to the commander: May I say something to you? You speak Greek, do you? the commander asked.
The servant said to himself, My master is going to dismiss me from my job. What shall I do? I am not strong enough to dig ditches, and I am ashamed to beg.
Your lives will be filled with the truly good qualities which only Jesus Christ can produce, for the glory and praise of God.
But they were terribly afraid and began to say to one another, Who is this  man? Even the wind and the waves obey him!
At once they left their nets and went with him.
The soldiers made a crown out of thorny branches and put it on his head; then they put a purple robe on him
Let us keep our eyes fixed on Jesus, on whom our faith depends from beginning to end. He did not give up because of the cross! On the contrary, because of the joy that was waiting for him, he thought nothing of the disgrace of dying on the cross, and he is now seated at the right side of God's throne.
You have died with Christ and are set free from the ruling spirits of the universe. Why, then, do you live as though you belonged to this world? Why do you obey such rules as
For the scripture says, God will order his angels to take good care of you.
In each church they appointed elders, and with prayers and fasting they commended them to the Lord, in whom they had put their trust.
This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazareth in Galilee, the crowds answered.
And the same is true of what God has done. He wanted to show his anger and to make his power known. But he was very patient in enduring those who were the objects of his anger, who were doomed to destruction.
For if the gospel we preach is hidden, it is hidden only from those who are being lost.
You are the people of God; he loved you and chose you for his own. So then, you must clothe yourselves with compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience.
So when this takes place, and the mortal has been changed into the immortal, then the scripture will come true: Death is destroyed; victory is complete!
But remember, my friends, what you were told in the past by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So Jesus answered her, You are a woman of great faith! What you want will be done for you. And at that very moment her daughter was healed.
When the Lord saw her, his heart was filled with pity for her, and he said to her, Don't cry.
For her sins are piled up as high as heaven, and God remembers her wicked ways.
(-) The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all.
Send the people away, and let them go to the nearby farms and villages in order to buy themselves something to eat.
I will be bold and speak only about what Christ has done through me to lead the Gentiles to obey God. He has done this by means of words and deeds,
The spirit screamed, threw the boy into a bad fit, and came out. The boy looked like a corpse, and everyone said, He is dead!
Ours, however, is only right, because we are getting what we deserve for what we did; but he has done no wrong.
In the meantime the older son was out in the field. On his way back, when he came close to the house, he heard the music and dancing.
who has placed his mark of ownership upon us, and who has given us the Holy Spirit in our hearts as the guarantee of all that he has in store for us.
Who are you, Lord? I asked. I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you persecute, he said to me.
With their shameless carousing they are like dirty spots in your fellowship meals. They take care only of themselves. They are like clouds carried along by the wind, but bringing no rain. They are like trees that bear no fruit, even in autumn, trees that have been pulled up by the roots and are completely dead.
I am telling you the truth: no slaves are greater than their master, and no messengers are greater than the one who sent them.
Jesus was walking in Solomon's Porch in the Temple,
After everyone had gone a long time without food, Paul stood before them and said, You should have listened to me and not have sailed from Crete; then we would have avoided all this damage and loss.
Some of you were like that. But you have been purified from sin; you have been dedicated to God; you have been put right with God by the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God.
That is why I told you that you will die in your sins. And you will die in your sins if you do not believe that I Am Who I Am'.
A second angel followed the first one, saying, She has fallen! Great Babylon has fallen! She made all peoples drink her wine -- the strong wine of her immoral lust!
[Teacher, they said to Jesus, this woman was caught in the very act of committing adultery.]
So Jesus said to those who believed in him, If you obey my teaching, you are really my disciples;
Then all the disciples left him and ran away.
The Spirit's presence is shown in some way in each person for the good of all.
How terrible for the world that there are things that make people lose their faith! Such things will always happen -- but how terrible for the one who causes them!
We continued our voyage, sailing from Tyre to Ptolemais, where we greeted the believers and stayed with them for a day.
You love what is right and hate what is wrong. That is why God, your God, has chosen you and has given you the joy of an honor far greater than he gave to your companions.
The right time has come, he said, and the Kingdom of God is near! Turn away from your sins and believe the Good News!
Then Jesus and his disciples went away to the villages near Caesarea Philippi. On the way he asked them, Tell me, who do people say I am?
We use it to give thanks to our Lord and Father and also to curse other people, who are created in the likeness of God.
An argument broke out among the disciples as to which one of them should be thought of as the greatest.
Jesus then said to his disciples, I assure you: it will be very hard for rich people to enter the Kingdom of heaven.
If you have ears, then, listen to what the Spirit says to the churches!
Then they crucified two bandits with Jesus, one on his right and the other on his left.
At that time a Jew named Apollos, who had been born in Alexandria, came to Ephesus. He was an eloquent speaker and had a thorough knowledge of the Scriptures.
Follow me, Jesus answered, and let the dead bury their own dead.
Jesus rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant, and sat down. All the people in the synagogue had their eyes fixed on him, 
As Jesus and his disciples went on their way, he came to a village where a woman named Martha welcomed him in her home.
when four men arrived, carrying a paralyzed man to Jesus.
where I have five brothers. Let him go and warn them so that they, at least, will not come to this place of pain.
It is the same way now: there is a small number left of those whom God has chosen because of his grace.
So he threw off his cloak, jumped up, and came to Jesus.
He also told them, Wherever you are welcomed, stay in the same house until you leave that place.
Yet there is something that keeps this from happening now, and you know what it is. At the proper time, then, the Wicked One will appear.
Some people were there who wanted to accuse Jesus of doing wrong; so they watched him closely to see whether he would cure the man on the Sabbath.
And God, who sees into our hearts, knows what the thought of the Spirit is; because the Spirit pleads with God on behalf of his people and in accordance with his will.
We heard him say, I will tear down this Temple which men have made, and after three days I will build one that is not made by men.
Surely you know that the wicked will not possess God's Kingdom. Do not fool yourselves; people who are immoral or who worship idols or are adulterers or homosexual perverts
What he commands is that we believe in his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as Christ commanded us.
She was soon to give birth, and the pains and suffering of childbirth made her cry out.
From Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ -- To those who through the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ have been given a faith as precious as ours:
Paul himself wanted to go before the crowd, but the believers would not let him.
The shepherds went back, singing praises to God for all they had heard and seen; it had been just as the angel had told them.
As soon as Jesus got out of the boat, he was met by a man who came out of the burial caves there. This man had an evil spirit in him
How happy I was to find that some of your children live in the truth, just as the Father commanded us.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and there is no truth in us.
God wants you to be holy and completely free from sexual immorality.
Don't you understand? Anything that goes into your mouth goes into your stomach and then on out of your body.
For we remember before our God and Father how you put your faith into practice, how your love made you work so hard, and how your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ is firm.
I have not stopped giving thanks to God for you. I remember you in my prayers
There is much we have to say about this matter, but it is hard to explain to you, because you are so slow to understand.
So then, faith comes from hearing the message, and the message comes through preaching Christ.
You know that Christ appeared in order to take away sins, and that there is no sin in him.
For John the Baptist came to you showing you the right path to take, and you would not believe him; but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. Even when you saw this, you did not later change your minds and believe him.
What the Law could not do, because human nature was weak, God did. He condemned sin in human nature by sending his own Son, who came with a nature like our sinful nature, to do away with sin.
Then some teachers of the Law said to themselves, This man is speaking blasphemy!
Some of it fell on rocky ground, where there was little soil. The seeds soon sprouted, because the soil wasn't deep.
Simon said to Peter and John, Please pray to the Lord for me, so that none of these things you spoke of will happen to me.
And they stayed a long time there with the believers.
Listen! says Jesus. I am coming soon! I will bring my rewards with me, to give to each one according to what he has done.
where some people brought to him a paralyzed man, lying on a bed. When Jesus saw how much faith they had, he said to the paralyzed man, Courage, my son! Your sins are forgiven.
The Spirit gives one person the power to work miracles; to another, the gift of speaking God's message; and to yet another, the ability to tell the difference between gifts that come from the Spirit and those that do not. To one person he gives the ability to speak in strange tongues, and to another he gives the ability to explain what is said.
And as for you, Capernaum! Did you want to lift yourself up to heaven? You will be thrown down to hell! If the miracles which were performed in you had been performed in Sodom, it would still be in existence today!
So he said to them, When you lift up the Son of Man, you will know that I Am Who I Am'; then you will know that I do nothing on my own authority, but I say only what the Father has instructed me to say.
But Jesus saw through their trick and answered, Why are you trying to trap me? Bring a silver coin, and let me see it.
Greetings to Mary, who has worked so hard for you.
Some of the seed fell among thorn bushes, which grew up and choked the plants, and they didn't bear grain.
To the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: This is the message from the one who is holy and true. He has the key that belonged to David, and when he opens a door, no one can close it, and when he closes it, no one can open it.
At that time the members of the churches in Judea did not know me personally.
The soldiers said to one another, Let's not tear it; let's throw dice to see who will get it. This happened in order to make the scripture come true: They divided my clothes among themselves and gambled for my robe. And this is what the soldiers did.
Many men, claiming to speak for me, will come and say, I am the Messiah! and they will fool many people.
But you, my friend, do those very things for which you pass judgment on others! Do you think you will escape God's judgment?
They don't have to leave, answered Jesus. You yourselves give them something to eat!
Apollos then decided to go to Achaia, so the believers in Ephesus helped him by writing to the believers in Achaia, urging them to welcome him. When he arrived, he was a great help to those who through God's grace had become believers.
When I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, do your best to come to me in Nicopolis, because I have decided to spend the winter there.
and by this time the boat was far out in the lake, tossed about by the waves, because the wind was blowing against it.
Then we shall no longer be children, carried by the waves and blown about by every shifting wind of the teaching of deceitful people, who lead others into error by the tricks they invent.
I have set an example for you, so that you will do just what I have done for you.
Happy and greatly blessed are those who are included in this first raising of the dead. The second death has no power over them; they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and they will rule with him for a thousand years.
I send greetings to Priscilla and Aquila and to the family of Onesiphorus.
Peter was still standing there keeping himself warm. So the others said to him, Aren't you also one of the disciples of that man? But Peter denied it. No, I am not, he said.
As the scripture says, I loved Jacob, but I hated Esau.
Jesus left that place and went to a synagogue,
The teacher of the Law said to Jesus, Well done, Teacher! It is true, as you say, that only the Lord is God and that there is no other god but he.
It was late that Sunday evening, and the disciples were gathered together behind locked doors, because they were afraid of the Jewish authorities. Then Jesus came and stood among them. Peace be with you, he said.
They take a good look at themselves and then go away and at once forget what they look like.
It is not what goes into your mouth that makes you ritually unclean; rather, what comes out of it makes you unclean.
At that time Jesus went up a hill to pray and spent the whole night there praying to God.
It does not matter! I am happy about it -- just so Christ is preached in every way possible, whether from wrong or right motives. And I will continue to be happy,
And we had hoped that he would be the one who was going to set Israel free! Besides all that, this is now the third day since it happened.
The disciples had rowed about three or four miles when they saw Jesus walking on the water, coming near the boat, and they were terrified.
And Jesus told them this parable: One blind man cannot lead another one; if he does, both will fall into a ditch.
Jesus said to him, You have already seen him, and he is the one who is talking with you now.
Why wasn't this perfume sold for three hundred silver coins and the money given to the poor?
and sang in a loud voice: The Lamb who was killed is worthy to receive power, wealth, wisdom, and strength, honor, glory, and praise!
We played wedding music for you, but you wouldn't dance! We sang funeral songs, but you wouldn't cry!
Jesus said to them, How unbelieving you people are! How long must I stay with you? How long do I have to put up with you? Bring the boy to me!
Some time later Paul said to Barnabas, Let us go back and visit the believers in every town where we preached the word of the Lord, and let us find out how they are getting along.
When the hour came, Jesus took his place at the table with the apostles.
For what seems to be God's foolishness is wiser than human wisdom, and what seems to be God's weakness is stronger than human strength.
You can be sure that on the Judgment Day God will show more mercy to Sodom than to you!
The news about this reached the church in Jerusalem, so they sent Barnabas to Antioch.
I did not know who he would be, but I came baptizing with water in order to make him known to the people of Israel.
when I broke the five loaves for the five thousand people? How many baskets full of leftover pieces did you take up? Twelve, they answered.
A virgin will become pregnant and have a son, and he will be called Immanuel (which means, God is with us).
We welcome this everywhere and at all times, and we are deeply grateful to you.
Well, religion does make us very rich, if we are satisfied with what we have.
The man replied, Ever since I was young, I have obeyed all these commandments.
After all, the man who makes the pots has the right to use the clay as he wishes, and to make two pots from the same lump of clay, one for special occasions and the other for ordinary use.
who gave himself to redeem the whole human race. That was the proof at the right time that God wants everyone to be saved,
Bethany was less than two miles from Jerusalem,
I am a free man, nobody's slave; but I make myself everybody's slave in order to win as many people as possible.
You cannot be a slave of two masters; you will hate one and love the other; you will be loyal to one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money.
Then they preached the word of the Lord to him and to all the others in the house.
Have I now become your enemy by telling you the truth?
They are the ones who speak evil of that good name which has been given to you.
So when these have been forgiven, an offering to take away sins is no longer needed.
And so your Temple will be abandoned and empty.
If you confess that Jesus is Lord and believe that God raised him from death, you will be saved.
Once there were seven brothers; the oldest got married and died without having children.
The matter becomes even plainer; a different priest has appeared, who is like Melchizedek.
Let us have confidence, then, and approach God's throne, where there is grace. There we will receive mercy and find grace to help us just when we need it.
The scripture says, Because of you Jews, the Gentiles speak evil of God.
I still did not know that he was the one, but God, who sent me to baptize with water, had said to me, You will see the Spirit come down and stay on a man; he is the one who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.
Think of what he went through; how he put up with so much hatred from sinners! So do not let yourselves become discouraged and give up.
Those who had seen it told the people how the man had been cured.
Now is the time for this world to be judged; now the ruler of this world will be overthrown.
No one chooses for himself the honor of being a high priest. It is only by God's call that a man is made a high priest -- just as Aaron was.
Now, to what can I compare the people of this day? They are like children sitting in the marketplace. One group shouts to the other,
to preach the message, to insist upon proclaiming it (whether the time is right or not), to convince, reproach, and encourage, as you teach with all patience.
And all the prophets who had a message, including Samuel and those who came after him, also announced what has been happening these days.
After hearing him, they all praised God. Then they said, Brother Paul, you can see how many thousands of Jews have become believers, and how devoted they all are to the Law.
God's divine power has given us everything we need to live a truly religious life through our knowledge of the one who called us to share in his own glory and goodness.
May grace and peace be yours in full measure through your knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord.
He will not break off a bent reed, nor put out a flickering lamp. He will persist until he causes justice to triumph, 
God bless the king who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven and glory to God!
I have told you this, so that you will not give up your faith.
but they saw him walking on the water. It's a ghost! they thought, and screamed.
He seized the dragon, that ancient serpent -- that is, the Devil, or Satan -- and chained him up for a thousand years.
God did not call us to live in immorality, but in holiness.
He then taught the people: It is written in the Scriptures that God said, My Temple will be called a house of prayer for the people of all nations. But you have turned it into a hideout for thieves!
Someone will ask, How can the dead be raised to life? What kind of body will they have?
Then a mighty angel picked up a stone the size of a large millstone and threw it into the sea, saying, This is how the great city Babylon will be violently thrown down and will never be seen again.
But the apostles thought that what the women said was nonsense, and they did not believe them.
Husbands, love your wives and do not be harsh with them.
I want to see you more than just briefly in passing; I hope to spend quite a long time with you, if the Lord allows.
Now, you can see and hear for yourselves what this fellow Paul is doing. He says that hand-made gods are not gods at all, and he has succeeded in convincing many people, both here in Ephesus and in nearly the whole province of Asia.
Do not listen to an accusation against an elder unless it is brought by two or more witnesses.
He is a guest in the home of a tanner of leather named Simon, who lives by the sea.
to do them the favor of having Paul come to Jerusalem, for they had made a plot to kill him on the way.
Jesus left that place, and as he walked along, two blind men started following him. Have mercy on us, Son of David! they shouted.
I tell you, said Jesus, the tax collector, and not the Pharisee, was in the right with God when he went home. For those who make themselves great will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be made great.
When Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, the baby moved within her. Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit
Remember this! Whoever does not receive the Kingdom of God like a child will never enter it.
You know that we treated each one of you just as parents treat their own children.
Love is made perfect in us in order that we may have courage on the Judgment Day; and we will have it because our life in this world is the same as Christ's.
Some of the provincial authorities, who were his friends, also sent him a message begging him not to show himself in the theater.
Do not use harmful words, but only helpful words, the kind that build up and provide what is needed, so that what you say will do good to those who hear you.
Then another angel came out from the temple and cried out in a loud voice to the one who was sitting on the cloud, Use your sickle and reap the harvest, because the time has come; the earth is ripe for the harvest!
From there we sailed on and arrived in the city of Rhegium. The next day a wind began to blow from the south, and in two days we came to the town of Puteoli.
Again it says, Rejoice, Gentiles, with God's people!
The Jewish authorities, however, were not willing to believe that he had been blind and could now see, until they called his parents
Then he took Simon to Jesus. Jesus looked at him and said, Your name is Simon son of John, but you will be called Cephas. (This is the same as Peter and means a rock.)
So the chief priests made plans to kill Lazarus too,
The gates of the city will stand open all day; they will never be closed, because there will be no night there.
He went straight to the synagogues and began to preach that Jesus was the Son of God.
He told us how he had seen an angel standing in his house, who said to him, Send someone to Joppa for a man whose full name is Simon Peter.
But what if our doing wrong serves to show up more clearly God's doing right? Can we say that God does wrong when he punishes us? (This would be the natural question to ask.)
Then the disciples came to him and said, Do you know that the Pharisees had their feelings hurt by what you said?
I am afraid that when I get there I will find you different from what I would like you to be and you will find me different from what you would like me to be. I am afraid that I will find quarreling and jealousy, hot tempers and selfishness, insults and gossip, pride and disorder.
Christ rules there above all heavenly rulers, authorities, powers, and lords; he has a title superior to all titles of authority in this world and in the next.
He answered, The man called Jesus made some mud, rubbed it on my eyes, and told me to go to Siloam and wash my face. So I went, and as soon as I washed, I could see.
If we say that we know him, but do not obey his commands, we are liars and there is no truth in us.
Because Jesus Christ did what God wanted him to do, we are all purified from sin by the offering that he made of his own body once and for all.
When Jesus finished telling these parables, he left that place
You have stayed with me all through my trials;
But now I beg you, take courage! Not one of you will lose your life; only the ship will be lost.
You must not be called Teacher, because you are all equal and have only one Teacher.
For this reason Jesus also died outside the city, in order to purify the people from sin with his own blood.
-So if your hand makes you lose your faith, cut it off! It is better for you to enter life without a hand than to keep both hands and go off to hell, to the fire that never goes out.
Joanna, whose husband Chuza was an officer in Herod's court; and Susanna, and many other women who used their own resources to help Jesus and his disciples.
From Peter, apostle of Jesus Christ -- To God's chosen people who live as refugees scattered throughout the provinces of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia.
Because of this, in one day she will be struck with plagues -- disease, grief, and famine. And she will be burned with fire, because the Lord God, who judges her, is mighty.
the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers in space will be driven from their courses.
Do not pay back evil with evil or cursing with cursing; instead, pay back with a blessing, because a blessing is what God promised to give you when he called you.
Those who obey God's commands live in union with God and God lives in union with them. And because of the Spirit that God has given us we know that God lives in union with us.
This means that he had to become like his people in every way, in order to be their faithful and merciful High Priest in his service to God, so that the people's sins would be forgiven.
But Christ is faithful as the Son in charge of God's house. We are his house if we keep up our courage and our confidence in what we hope for.
Some say that you are John the Baptist, they answered; others say that you are Elijah, while others say that you are one of the prophets.
Greet one another with the kiss of Christian love. May peace be with all of you who belong to Christ.
But they will not get very far, because everyone will see how stupid they are. That is just what happened to Jannes and Jambres.
Those who do not take up their cross and follow in my steps are not fit to be my disciples.
As it is, however, the sacrifices serve year after year to remind people of their sins.
But Jesus took her by the hand and called out, Get up, child!
When Peter went to Jerusalem, those who were in favor of circumcising Gentiles criticized him, saying,
By our purity, knowledge, patience, and kindness we have shown ourselves to be God's servants -- by the Holy Spirit, by our true love,
You will be handed over by your parents, your brothers, your relatives, and your friends; and some of you will be put to death.
The time will come when people will not listen to sound doctrine, but will follow their own desires and will collect for themselves more and more teachers who will tell them what they are itching to hear.
We are not trying to dictate to you what you must believe; we know that you stand firm in the faith. Instead, we are working with you for your own happiness.
The sins of some people are plain to see, and their sins go ahead of them to judgment; but the sins of others are seen only later.
He will go ahead of the Lord, strong and mighty like the prophet Elijah. He will bring fathers and children together again; he will turn disobedient people back to the way of thinking of the righteous; he will get the Lord's people ready for him.
Jesus left there and went along by Lake Galilee. He climbed a hill and sat down.
Now, the important thing is that your way of life should be as the gospel of Christ requires, so that, whether or not I am able to go and see you, I will hear that you are standing firm with one common purpose and that with only one desire you are fighting together for the faith of the gospel.
If Timothy comes your way, be sure to make him feel welcome among you, because he is working for the Lord, just as I am.
Those who do not love me do not obey my teaching. And the teaching you have heard is not mine, but comes from the Father, who sent me.
and to the governors, who have been appointed by him to punish the evildoers and to praise those who do good.
He came to us, took Paul's belt, tied up his own feet and hands with it, and said, This is what the Holy Spirit says: The owner of this belt will be tied up in this way by the Jews in Jerusalem, and they will hand him over to the Gentiles.
One day Jesus was standing on the shore of Lake Gennesaret while the people pushed their way up to him to listen to the word of God.
Jesus again used parables in talking to the people.
Jesus answered him, Friend, who gave me the right to judge or to divide the property between you two?
For the sadness that is used by God brings a change of heart that leads to salvation -- and there is no regret in that! But sadness that is merely human causes death.
If your hand or your foot makes you lose your faith, cut it off and throw it away! It is better for you to enter life without a hand or a foot than to keep both hands and both feet and be thrown into the eternal fire.
All things are done according to God's plan and decision; and God chose us to be his own people in union with Christ because of his own purpose, based on what he had decided from the very beginning.
Anyone who is not for me is really against me; anyone who does not help me gather is really scattering.
I was hungry and you fed me, thirsty and you gave me a drink; I was a stranger and you received me in your homes,
both Jews and Gentiles converted to Judaism, and some of us are from Crete and Arabia -- yet all of us hear them speaking in our own languages about the great things that God has done!
So then, my dear friends, stand firm and steady. Keep busy always in your work for the Lord, since you know that nothing you do in the Lord's service is ever useless.
It is not we who have closed our hearts to you; it is you who have closed your hearts to us.
He is like a man who, in building his house, dug deep and laid the foundation on rock. The river flooded over and hit that house but could not shake it, because it was well built.
The robe he wore was covered with blood. His name is The Word of God.
You tolerate anyone who orders you around or takes advantage of you or traps you or looks down on you or slaps you in the face.
Each one of the four living creatures had six wings, and they were covered with eyes, inside and out. Day and night they never stop singing: Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God Almighty, who was, who is, and who is to come.
But they all began, one after another, to make excuses. The first one told the servant, I have bought a field and must go and look at it; please accept my apologies.
So they grabbed the son and killed him and threw his body out of the vineyard.
That night the Lord stood by Paul and said, Don't be afraid! You have given your witness for me here in Jerusalem, and you must also do the same in Rome.
He is the one who holds the whole building together and makes it grow into a sacred temple dedicated to the Lord.
This is the greatest and the most important commandment.
He stared at the angel in fear and said, What is it, sir? The angel answered, God is pleased with your prayers and works of charity, and is ready to answer you.
But if that servant says to himself that his master is taking a long time to come back and if he begins to beat the other servants, both the men and the women, and eats and drinks and gets drunk,
Then the man went out and met one of his fellow servants who owed him a few dollars. He grabbed him and started choking him. Pay back what you owe me! he said.
The scripture says that the Messiah will be a descendant of King David and will be born in Bethlehem, the town where David lived.
So Christ came and preached the Good News of peace to all -- to you Gentiles, who were far away from God, and to the Jews, who were near to him.
So the disciples started asking among themselves, Could somebody have brought him food?
This was done to make the scripture come true: Not one of his bones will be broken.
We must thank God at all times for you, friends, you whom the Lord loves. For God chose you as the first to be saved by the Spirit's power to make you his holy people and by your faith in the truth.
Those who accept my commandments and obey them are the ones who love me. My Father will love those who love me; I too will love them and reveal myself to them.
It is like this. A man takes a mustard seed, the smallest seed in the world, and plants it in the ground.
Then Saul -- also known as Paul -- was filled with the Holy Spirit; he looked straight at the magician
My greetings to Ampliatus, my dear friend in the fellowship of the Lord.
He said to them, Why are you sleeping? Get up and pray that you will not fall into temptation.
So he called in all the people who were in debt to his master. He asked the first one, How much do you owe my master?
So we preach Christ to everyone. With all possible wisdom we warn and teach them in order to bring each one into God's presence as a mature individual in union with Christ.
The people stood there watching while the Jewish leaders made fun of him: He saved others; let him save himself if he is the Messiah whom God has chosen!
The day came during the Festival of Unleavened Bread when the lambs for the Passover meal were to be killed.
Those who win the victory will receive this from me: I will be their God, and they will be my children.
Instead, be kind and tender-hearted to one another, and forgive one another, as God has forgiven you through Christ.
Your gold and silver are covered with rust, and this rust will be a witness against you and will eat up your flesh like fire. You have piled up riches in these last days.
But this is what you have in your favor: you hate what the Nicolaitans do, as much as I do.
Peter said to him, Ananias, why did you let Satan take control of you and make you lie to the Holy Spirit by keeping part of the money you received for the property?
Then they prayed, Lord, you know the thoughts of everyone, so show us which of these two you have chosen
This is why I tell you: do not be worried about the food and drink you need in order to stay alive, or about clothes for your body. After all, isn't life worth more than food? And isn't the body worth more than clothes?
Paul was about to speak when Gallio said to the Jews, If this were a matter of some evil crime or wrong that has been committed, it would be reasonable for me to be patient with you Jews.
If you are like that, unable to make up your mind and undecided in all you do, you must not think that you will receive anything from the Lord.
He said, I tell you that this poor widow put in more than all the others.
For even though you know all this, I want to remind you of how the Lord once rescued the people of Israel from Egypt, but afterward destroyed those who did not believe.
My Father has given me all things. No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.
When the grain is ripe, the man starts cutting it with his sickle, because harvest time has come.
Get up, let us go. Look, here is the man who is betraying me!
When he met us in Assos, we took him aboard and went on to Mitylene.
Once there were two men who went up to the Temple to pray: one was a Pharisee, the other a tax collector.
Mary said, My heart praises the Lord;
The Jews have rules about ritual washing, and for this purpose six stone water jars were there, each one large enough to hold between twenty and thirty gallons.
Suddenly a strong wind blew up, and the waves began to spill over into the boat, so that it was about to fill with water.
And if your eye makes you lose your faith, take it out! It is better for you to enter the Kingdom of God with only one eye than to keep both eyes and be thrown into hell.
But in church worship I would rather speak five words that can be understood, in order to teach others, than speak thousands of words in strange tongues.
Show me a silver coin. Whose face and name are these on it? The Emperor's, they answered.
Don't you have your own homes in which to eat and drink? Or would you rather despise the church of God and put to shame the people who are in need? What do you expect me to say to you about this? Shall I praise you? Of course I don't!
He was taught all the wisdom of the Egyptians and became a great man in words and deeds.
Then the third angel blew his trumpet. A large star, burning like a torch, dropped from the sky and fell on a third of the rivers and on the springs of water.
When you go into a house, say, Peace be with you.
Jesus answered with a question, What law did Moses give you?
How terrible for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees! You hypocrites! You make fine tombs for the prophets and decorate the monuments of those who lived good lives;
John also was baptizing in Aenon, not far from Salim, because there was plenty of water in that place. People were going to him, and he was baptizing them.
I ask God from the wealth of his glory to give you power through his Spirit to be strong in your inner selves,
But the rest of you in Thyatira have not followed this evil teaching; you have not learned what the others call the deep secrets of Satan. I say to you that I will not put any other burden on you.
These are the people who cause divisions, who are controlled by their natural desires, who do not have the Spirit.
If you love others, you will never do them wrong; to love, then, is to obey the whole Law.
For we are like a sweet-smelling incense offered by Christ to God, which spreads among those who are being saved and those who are being lost.
As the crowd heard these words, they became furious and started shouting, Great is Artemis of Ephesus!
They want to be teachers of God's law, but they do not understand their own words or the matters about which they speak with so much confidence.
by the power of miracles and wonders, and by the power of the Spirit of God. And so, in traveling all the way from Jerusalem to Illyricum, I have proclaimed fully the Good News about Christ.
in worship of idols and witchcraft. People become enemies and they fight; they become jealous, angry, and ambitious. They separate into parties and groups;
it says to itself, I will go back to my house. So it goes back and finds the house empty, clean, and all fixed up.
This difference, then, also makes Jesus the guarantee of a better covenant.
Jesus noticed that the crowd was closing in on them, so he gave a command to the evil spirit. Deaf and dumb spirit, he said, I order you to come out of the boy and never go into him again!
and it is for this reason that I suffer these things. But I am still full of confidence, because I know whom I have trusted, and I am sure that he is able to keep safe until that Day what he has entrusted to me.
For just as all people die because of their union with Adam, in the same way all will be raised to life because of their union with Christ.
and the church that meets in your house, and our sister Apphia, and our fellow soldier Archippus:
When his period of service in the Temple was over, Zechariah went back home.
On with it, then, and finish the job! Be as eager to finish it as you were to plan it, and do it with what you now have.
the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda,
His answer was, Elijah is indeed coming first in order to get everything ready. Yet why do the Scriptures say that the Son of Man will suffer much and be rejected?
God never said to any of his angels: Sit here at my right side until I put your enemies as a footstool under your feet.
How terrible for them! They have followed the way that Cain took. For the sake of money they have given themselves over to the error that Balaam committed. They have rebelled as Korah rebelled, and like him they are destroyed.
At once the men who were going to question Paul drew back from him; and the commander was frightened when he realized that Paul was a Roman citizen and that he had put him in chains.
And Jesus concluded, That is how my Father in heaven will treat every one of you unless you forgive your brother from your heart.
Who is greater, the one who sits down to eat or the one who serves? The one who sits down, of course. But I am among you as one who serves.
When one of you says, I follow Paul, and another, I follow Apollos -- aren't you acting like worldly people?
But if any Christian woman has widows in her family, she must take care of them and not put the burden on the church, so that it may take care of the widows who are all alone.
How were you treated any worse than the other churches, except that I did not bother you for financial help? Please forgive me for being so unfair!
All we have here are five loaves and two fish, they replied.
When he arrived at the house, he would not let anyone go in with him except Peter, John, and James, and the child's father and mother.
But I do not have the right to choose who will sit at my right and my left. It is God who will give these places to those for whom he has prepared them.
In the same way that Jonah spent three days and nights in the big fish, so  will the Son of Man spend three days and nights in the depths of the earth.
Whoever opposes the existing authority opposes what God has ordered; and anyone who does so will bring judgment on himself.
Who will accuse God's chosen people? God himself declares them not guilty!
But the disciples did not understand any of these things; the meaning of the words was hidden from them, and they did not know what Jesus was talking about.
Pilate wrote a notice and had it put on the cross. Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews, is what he wrote.
They went on from Perga and arrived in Antioch in Pisidia, and on the Sabbath they went into the synagogue and sat down.
In the same way, all of us, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether slaves or free, have been baptized into the one body by the same Spirit, and we have all been given the one Spirit to drink.
Why do you call me good? Jesus asked him. No one is good except God alone.
But John reprimanded Governor Herod, because he had married Herodias, his brother's wife, and had done many other evil things.
We call them happy because they endured. You have heard of Job's patience, and you know how the Lord provided for him in the end. For the Lord is full of mercy and compassion.
And God said, For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and unite with his wife, and the two will become one.
You are always in my heart! And so it is only right for me to feel as I do about you. For you have all shared with me in this privilege that God has given me, both now that I am in prison and also while I was free to defend the gospel and establish it firmly.
Christ existed before all things, and in union with him all things have their proper place.
They came to Jesus and begged him earnestly, This man really deserves your help.
But those who depend on faith, not on deeds, and who believe in the God who declares the guilty to be innocent, it is this faith that God takes into account in order to put them right with himself.
[After Jesus rose from death early on Sunday, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had driven out seven demons.]
Teach these things and use your full authority as you encourage and rebuke your hearers. Let none of them look down on you.
If someone is going to speak in strange tongues, two or three at the most should speak, one after the other, and someone else must explain what is being said.
Jesus cried out in a loud voice, Father! In your hands I place my spirit! He said this and died.
The child's father and mother were amazed at the things Simeon said about him.
because on his account many Jews were rejecting them and believing in Jesus.
Jesus answered them, How right Isaiah was when he prophesied about you! You are hypocrites, just as he wrote: These people, says God, honor  me with their words, but their heart is really far away from me.
But when our time with them was over, we left and went on our way. All of them, together with their wives and children, went with us out of the city to the beach, where we all knelt and prayed.
When Herod, the ruler of Galilee, heard about all the things that were happening, he was very confused, because some people were saying that John the Baptist had come back to life.
Such will be the spread of evil that many people's love will grow cold.
Don't give the Devil a chance.
God will do what is right: he will bring suffering on those who make you suffer,
So then, have your minds ready for action. Keep alert and set your hope completely on the blessing which will be given you when Jesus Christ is revealed.
And Jesus concluded, So those who are last will be first, and those who are first will be last.
On the evening of that same day Jesus said to his disciples, Let us go across to the other side of the lake.
Some teachers of the Law who had come from Jerusalem were saying, He has Beelzebul in him! It is the chief of the demons who gives him the power to drive them out.
You have been raised to life with Christ, so set your hearts on the things that are in heaven, where Christ sits on his throne at the right side of God.
Instead, be concerned above everything else with the Kingdom of God and with what he requires of you, and he will provide you with all these other things.
None of you should be looking out for your own interests, but for the interests of others.
All of us fell to the ground, and I heard a voice say to me in Hebrew, Saul, Saul! Why are you persecuting me? You are hurting yourself by hitting back, like an ox kicking against its owner's stick.
Then Jesus replied, I have been sent only to the lost sheep of the people of Israel.
They asked Jesus, Were we not right in saying that you are a Samaritan and have a demon in you?
And as for you, Capernaum! Did you want to lift yourself up to heaven? You will be thrown down to hell! 
What did we bring into the world? Nothing! What can we take out of the world? Nothing!
Peter traveled everywhere, and on one occasion he went to visit God's people who lived in Lydda.
Are any among you sick? They should send for the church elders, who will pray for them and rub olive oil on them in the name of the Lord.
These people really did not belong to our fellowship, and that is why they left us; if they had belonged to our fellowship, they would have stayed with us. But they left so that it might be clear that none of them really belonged to us.
After the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices to go and anoint the body of Jesus.
When a woman is about to give birth, she is sad because her hour of suffering has come; but when the baby is born, she forgets her suffering, because she is happy that a baby has been born into the world.
May mercy, peace, and love be yours in full measure.
While Jesus was having a meal in Matthew's house, many tax collectors and other outcasts came and joined Jesus and his disciples at the table.
that he was buried and that he was raised to life three days later, as written in the Scriptures;
Do not try to stop him, Jesus told them, because no one who performs a miracle in my name will be able soon afterward to say evil things about me.
James and his brother John, the sons of Zebedee (Jesus gave them the name Boanerges, which means Men of Thunder);
Now, concerning what you wrote about unmarried people: I do not have a command from the Lord, but I give my opinion as one who by the Lord's mercy is worthy of trust.
from Jerusalem, from the territory of Idumea, from the territory on the east side of the Jordan, and from the region around the cities of Tyre and Sidon. All these people came to Jesus because they had heard of the things he was doing.
The Holy Spirit said to Philip, Go over to that carriage and stay close to it.
My dear friends, I was doing my best to write to you about the salvation we share in common, when I felt the need of writing at once to encourage you to fight on for the faith which once and for all God has given to his people.
One of the soldiers, however, plunged his spear into Jesus' side, and at once blood and water poured out.
Under his control all the different parts of the body fit together, and the whole body is held together by every joint with which it is provided. So when each separate part works as it should, the whole body grows and builds itself up through love.
and teach them to obey everything I have commanded you. And I will be with you always, to the end of the age. Mark
One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues came to me and said, Come, and I will show you the Bride, the wife of the Lamb.
It was about twelve o'clock when the sun stopped shining and darkness covered the whole country until three o'clock; and the curtain hanging in the Temple was torn in two.
I baptize you with water, but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.
He did this so that they would look for him, and perhaps find him as they felt around for him. Yet God is actually not far from any one of us;
There he met a Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, who had recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, for Emperor Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome. Paul went to see them,
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, always give thanks for everything to God the Father.
Then what the prophet Jeremiah had said came true: They took the thirty silver coins, the amount the people of Israel had agreed to pay for him, 
They are quick to hurt and kill;
For he has fixed a day in which he will judge the whole world with justice by means of a man he has chosen. He has given proof of this to everyone by raising that man from death!
For there are different reasons why men cannot marry: some, because they were born that way; others, because men made them that way; and others do not marry for the sake of the Kingdom of heaven. Let him who can accept this teaching do so.
The foreigners, answered Peter. Well, then, replied Jesus, that means that the citizens don't have to pay.
No spring of water pours out sweet water and bitter water from the same opening.
For this reason I could be bold enough, as your brother in Christ, to order you to do what should be done.
So then, you must not despise those who were broken off like branches. How can you be proud? You are just a branch; you don't support the roots -- the roots support you.
Who, then, will condemn them? Not Christ Jesus, who died, or rather, who was raised to life and is at the right side of God, pleading with him for us!
And what is truth? Pilate asked.Then Pilate went back outside to the people and said to them, I cannot find any reason to condemn him.
Do your best to come to me soon.
Judas son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became the traitor.
For we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of your love for all God's people.
I ask, then: Did God reject his own people? Certainly not! I myself am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, a member of the tribe of Benjamin.
Your faith, then, does not rest on human wisdom but on God's power.
Judas agreed to it and started looking for a good chance to hand Jesus over to them without the people knowing about it.
Do not be ashamed, then, of witnessing for our Lord; neither be ashamed of me, a prisoner for Christ's sake. Instead, take your part in suffering for the Good News, as God gives you the strength for it.
But when the tenants saw him, they said to one another, This is the owner's son. Let's kill him, and his property will be ours!
(:)
But Jesus said, Leave her alone! Why are you bothering her? She has done a fine and beautiful thing for me.
But when the officials arrived, they did not find the apostles in prison, so they returned to the Council and reported,
respect your father and your mother; and love your neighbor as you love yourself.
As Jesus sat on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him in private. Tell us when all this will be, they asked, and what will happen to show that it is the time for your coming and the end of the age.
And every day in the Temple and in people's homes they continued to teach and preach the Good News about Jesus the Messiah.
and as your shoes the readiness to announce the Good News of peace.
After the people had left the meeting, Paul and Barnabas were followed by many Jews and by many Gentiles who had been converted to Judaism. The apostles spoke to them and encouraged them to keep on living in the grace of God.
So we say that the Gentiles, who were not trying to put themselves right with God, were put right with him through faith;
The servant who knows what his master wants him to do, but does not get himself ready and do it, will be punished with a heavy whipping.
Peter kept on talking to Cornelius as he went into the house, where he found many people gathered.
And you still don't understand? he asked them.
May God, our source of peace, be with all of you. Amen.
I talk about what my Father has shown me, but you do what your father has told you.
The first one looked like a lion; the second looked like a bull; the third had a face like a human face; and the fourth looked like an eagle in flight.
The Kingdom of heaven is like this. Once there was a man who went out early in the morning to hire some men to work in his vineyard.
The Spirit took control of me, and the angel carried me to a desert. There I saw a woman sitting on a red beast that had names insulting to God written all over it; the beast had seven heads and ten horns.
One Sabbath Jesus was teaching in a synagogue.
He said to another man, Follow me. But that man said, Sir, first let me go back and bury my father.
Even handkerchiefs and aprons he had used were taken to the sick, and their diseases were driven away, and the evil spirits would go out of them.
God is my witness that I tell the truth when I say that my deep feeling for you all comes from the heart of Christ Jesus himself.
Jesus returned from the Jordan full of the Holy Spirit and was led by the Spirit into the desert,
Later on Jesus was having a meal in Levi's house. A large number of tax collectors and other outcasts was following Jesus, and many of them joined him and his disciples at the table.
When the disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord, do you want us to call fire down from heaven to destroy them?
Afterward, Jesus found him in the Temple and said, Listen, you are well now; so stop sinning or something worse may happen to you.
Then he took the seven loaves and the fish, gave thanks to God, broke them, and gave them to the disciples; and the disciples gave them to the people.
If you plant in the field of your natural desires, from it you will gather the harvest of death; if you plant in the field of the Spirit, from the Spirit you will gather the harvest of eternal life.
But Paul defended himself: I have done nothing wrong against the Law of the Jews or against the Temple or against the Roman Emperor.
Everybody kept on eating and drinking, and men and women married, up to the very day Noah went into the boat and the flood came and killed them all.
Everything that God has created is good; nothing is to be rejected, but everything is to be received with a prayer of thanks,
All these refer to things which become useless once they are used; they are only human rules and teachings.
The whole Law of Moses and the teachings of the prophets depend on these two commandments.
Yes, may you come to know his love -- although it can never be fully known -- and so be completely filled with the very nature of God.
One of them, named Cleopas, asked him, Are you the only visitor in Jerusalem who doesn't know the things that have been happening there these last few days?
We have been beaten, jailed, and mobbed; we have been overworked and have gone without sleep or food.
But if you act like wild animals, hurting and harming each other, then watch out, or you will completely destroy one another.
Do you not believe, Philip, that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I have spoken to you, Jesus said to his disciples, do not come from me. The Father, who remains in me, does his own work.
You see, then, that it is by our actions that we are put right with God, and not by our faith alone.
Consider the experience of Abraham; as the scripture says, He believed God, and because of his faith God accepted him as righteous.
For those who do such things are not serving Christ our Lord, but their own appetites. By their fine words and flattering speech they deceive innocent people.
and those parts that we think aren't worth very much are the ones which we treat with greater care; while the parts of the body which don't look very nice are treated with special modesty,
He went into the presence of Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
But the truth is that Christ has been raised from death, as the guarantee that those who sleep in death will also be raised.
But if we say, From human beings... (They were afraid of the people, because everyone was convinced that John had been a prophet.)
Here we are, then, speaking for Christ, as though God himself were making his appeal through us. We plead on Christ's behalf: let God change you from enemies into his friends!
You are patient, you have suffered for my sake, and you have not given up.
There was a chief tax collector there named Zacchaeus, who was rich.
While they were eating, Jesus took a piece of bread, gave a prayer of thanks, broke it, and gave it to his disciples. Take it, he said, this is my body.
But Paul shouted at the top of his voice, Don't harm yourself! We are all here!
When you meet together as a group, it is not the Lord's Supper that you eat.
They were written also for us who are to be accepted as righteous, who believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from death.
He must be mature in the faith, so that he will not swell up with pride and be condemned, as the Devil was.
so the Jewish authorities told the man who had been healed, This is a Sabbath, and it is against our Law for you to carry your mat.
In the same way Moses also sprinkled the blood on the Sacred Tent and over all the things used in worship.
No, Jesus answered, even though I do testify on my own behalf, what I say is true, because I know where I came from and where I am going. You do not know where I came from or where I am going.
Stand firm, and you will save yourselves.
But the things that come out of the mouth come from the heart, and these are the things that make you ritually unclean.
He will send the angels out to the four corners of the earth to gather God's chosen people from one end of the world to the other.
After being away from Jerusalem for several years, I went there to take some money to my own people and to offer sacrifices.
Remember your former leaders, who spoke God's message to you. Think back on how they lived and died, and imitate their faith.
The other Jewish believers also started acting like cowards along with Peter; and even Barnabas was swept along by their cowardly action.
He set free the man they wanted, the one who had been put in prison for riot and murder, and he handed Jesus over for them to do as they wished.
They answered, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you will be saved -- you and your family.
The Roman commander ordered his men to take Paul into the fort, and he told them to whip him in order to find out why the Jews were screaming like this against him.
He led the people out of Egypt, performing miracles and wonders in Egypt and at the Red Sea and for forty years in the desert.
All this happened in Bethany on the east side of the Jordan River, where John was baptizing.
We are the descendants of Abraham, they answered, and we have never been anybody's slaves. What do you mean, then, by saying, You will be free?
Jesus stopped and called them. What do you want me to do for you? he asked them.
I tell you all that none of those who were invited will taste my dinner!
When Jesus had come down from the hill with the apostles, he stood on a level place with a large number of his disciples. A large crowd of people was there from all over Judea and from Jerusalem and from the coast cities of Tyre and Sidon;
And so I do my best always to have a clear conscience before God and people.
and asked, What will you give me if I betray Jesus to you? They counted out thirty silver coins and gave them to him.
You have been married to five men, and the man you live with now is not really your husband. You have told me the truth.
Indeed, we are Jews by birth and not Gentile sinners, as they are called.
In this way he has given us the very great and precious gifts he promised, so that by means of these gifts you may escape from the destructive lust that is in the world, and may come to share the divine nature.
On the Lord's day the Spirit took control of me, and I heard a loud voice, that sounded like a trumpet, speaking behind me.
Endure what you suffer as being a father's punishment; your suffering shows that God is treating you as his children. Was there ever a child who was not punished by his father?
When John's disciples told him about all these things, he called two of them
While Jesus was saying this, some messengers came from Jairus' house and told him, Your daughter has died. Why bother the Teacher any longer?
Unfaithful people! Don't you know that to be the world's friend means to be God's enemy? If you want to be the world's friend, you make yourself God's enemy.
Jesus said all this as he taught in the Temple, in the room where the offering boxes were placed. And no one arrested him, because his hour had not come.
Timothy, my child, I entrust to you this command, which is in accordance with the words of prophecy spoken in the past about you. Use those words as weapons in order to fight well,
This book is the record of the events that Jesus Christ revealed. God gave him this revelation in order to show to his servants what must happen very soon. Christ made these things known to his servant John by sending his angel to him,
And Jesus concluded, Listen, then, if you have ears!
He held seven stars in his right hand, and a sharp two-edged sword came out of his mouth. His face was as bright as the midday sun.
But our ancestors refused to obey him; they pushed him aside and wished that they could go back to Egypt.
The crowds were all amazed at what Jesus had done. Could he be the Son of David? they asked.
When he saw Jesus, he gave a loud cry, threw himself down at his feet, and shouted, Jesus, Son of the Most High God! What do you want with me? I beg you, don't punish me! 
The army officer who was standing there in front of the cross saw how Jesus had died. This man was really the Son of God! he said.
Even so, many will follow their immoral ways; and because of what they do, others will speak evil of the Way of truth.
So then, if we do not do the good we know we should do, we are guilty of sin.
while Paul chose Silas and left, commended by the believers to the care of the Lord's grace.
Out of the fullness of his grace he has blessed us all, giving us one blessing after another.
At that time there was a well-known prisoner named Jesus Barabbas.
Jesus answered him, If I have said anything wrong, tell everyone here what it was. But if I am right in what I have said, why do you hit me?
I myself thought that I should do everything I could against the cause of Jesus of Nazareth.
Now, what about those people who are baptized for the dead? What do they hope to accomplish? If it is true, as some claim, that the dead are not raised to life, why are those people being baptized for the dead?
Jesus said in a loud voice, Whoever believes in me believes not only in me but also in him who sent me.
but he was told of their plan. Day and night they watched the city gates in order to kill him.
The younger one said to him, Father, give me my share of the property now. So the man divided his property between his two sons.
but the world must know that I love the Father; that is why I do everything as he commands me. Come, let us go from this place.
How terrible when all people speak well of you; their ancestors said the very same things about the false prophets.
Do not even swear by your head, because you cannot make a single hair white or black.
Who are you to judge the servants of someone else? It is their own Master who will decide whether they succeed or fail. And they will succeed, because the Lord is able to make them succeed.
Let us praise the Lord, the God of Israel! He has come to the help of his people and has set them free.
But before the end comes, the gospel must be preached to all peoples.
But when the tenants saw the son, they said to themselves, This is the owner's son. Come on, let's kill him, and we will get his property!
and said to him, Leave your family and country and go to the land that I will show you.
But his mother said, No! His name is to be John.
I am not seeking honor for myself. But there is one who is seeking it and who judges in my favor.
If you believe, you will receive whatever you ask for in prayer.
The churches in the province of Asia send you their greetings; Aquila and Priscilla and the church that meets in their house send warm Christian greetings.
When the time drew near for God to keep the promise he had made to Abraham, the number of our people in Egypt had grown much larger.
What shall we say the Kingdom of God is like? asked Jesus. What parable shall we use to explain it?
We kept close to the coast and with great difficulty came to a place called Safe Harbors, not far from the town of Lasea.
He went away once more and prayed, saying the same words.
After Martha said this, she went back and called her sister Mary privately. The Teacher is here, she told her, and is asking for you.
so Jesus' brothers said to him, Leave this place and go to Judea, so that your followers will see the things that you are doing.
More than that, we are shown to be lying about God, because we said that he raised Christ from death -- but if it is true that the dead are not raised to life, then he did not raise Christ.
For this purpose I am sending to you Timothy, who is my own dear and faithful son in the Christian life. He will remind you of the principles which I follow in the new life in union with Christ Jesus and which I teach in all the churches everywhere.
If you are ashamed of me and of my teaching in this godless and wicked day, then the Son of Man will be ashamed of you when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.
Hypocrites! You can look at the earth and the sky and predict the weather; why, then, don't you know the meaning of this present time?
So then, I am eager to preach the Good News to you also who live in Rome.
By faith he lived as a foreigner in the country that God had promised him. He lived in tents, as did Isaac and Jacob, who received the same promise from God.
The great trumpet will sound, and he will send out his angels to the four corners of the earth, and they will gather his chosen people from one end of the world to the other.
Jesus answered, Do you think you can make the guests at a wedding party go without food as long as the bridegroom is with them? Of course not!
If I wanted to boast, I would not be a fool, because I would be telling the truth. But I will not boast, because I do not want any of you to have a higher opinion of me than you have as a result of what you have seen me do and heard me say.
and he will go out to deceive the nations scattered over the whole world, that is, Gog and Magog. Satan will bring them all together for battle, as many as the grains of sand on the seashore.
Nor was man created for woman's sake, but woman was created for man's sake.
Many men, claiming to speak for me, will come and say, I am he! and they will fool many people.
In union with Christ you were circumcised, not with the circumcision that is made by human beings, but with the circumcision made by Christ, which consists of being freed from the power of this sinful self.
After a little while a man noticed Peter and said, You are one of them, too! But Peter answered, Man, I am not!
Jesus looked at them and asked, What, then, does this scripture mean? The stone which the builders rejected as worthless turned out to be the most important of all.
And if the Governor should hear of this, we will convince him that you are innocent, and you will have nothing to worry about.
and made us a kingdom of priests to serve his God and Father. To Jesus Christ be the glory and power forever and ever! Amen.
He who comes from God listens to God's words. You, however, are not from God, and that is why you will not listen.
But as for you, Christ has poured out his Spirit on you. As long as his Spirit remains in you, you do not need anyone to teach you. For his Spirit teaches you about everything, and what he teaches is true, not false. Obey the Spirit's teaching, then, and remain in union with Christ.
Among them are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have punished by handing them over to the power of Satan; this will teach them to stop their blasphemy.
Simon (whom he named Peter) and his brother Andrew; James and John, Philip and Bartholomew,
In the case of a will it is necessary to prove that the person who made it has died,
I, John, solemnly warn everyone who hears the prophetic words of this book: if any add anything to them, God will add to their punishment the plagues described in this book.
As soon as he said this, the Pharisees and Sadducees started to quarrel, and the group was divided.
Then he led them out of the city as far as Bethany, where he raised his hands and blessed them.
Go! I am sending you like lambs among wolves.
There were so many people coming and going that Jesus and his disciples didn't even have time to eat. So he said to them, Let us go off by ourselves to some place where we will be alone and you can rest a while.
He used parables to teach them many things, saying to them:
And so his love for you grows stronger, as he remembers how all of you were ready to obey his instructions, how you welcomed him with fear and trembling.
So then, if she lives with another man while her husband is alive, she will be called an adulteress; but if her husband dies, she is legally a free woman and does not commit adultery if she marries another man.
Jesus answered, I will dip some bread in the sauce and give it to him; he is the man. So he took a piece of bread, dipped it, and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot.
Jesus turned around and saw her, and said, Courage, my daughter! Your faith has made you well. At that very moment the woman became well.
and the two will become one. So they are no longer two, but one.
The High Priest tore his robes and said, We don't need any more witnesses!
So Peter was kept in jail, but the people of the church were praying earnestly to God for him.
[Early the next morning he went back to the Temple. All the people gathered around him, and he sat down and began to teach them.]
Were you a slave when God called you? Well, never mind; but if you have a chance to become free, use it.
But Jesus said to them, It was not for my sake that this voice spoke, but for yours.
Those men are not true apostles -- they are false apostles, who lie about their work and disguise themselves to look like real apostles of Christ.
all these evil things come from inside you and make you unclean.
The scripture says, I spoke because I believed. In the same spirit of faith we also speak because we believe.
No human being must separate, then, what God has joined together.
Jesus answered them, Now let me ask you a question. Tell me,
It was faith that made Jacob bless each of the sons of Joseph just before he died. He leaned on the top of his walking stick and worshiped God.
Then a man came in and said to them, Listen! The men you put in prison are in the Temple teaching the people!
A light to reveal your will to the Gentiles and bring glory to your people Israel.
Happy are those who wash their robes clean and so have the right to eat the fruit from the tree of life and to go through the gates into the city.
I did not receive it from any human being, nor did anyone teach it to me. It was Jesus Christ himself who revealed it to me.
If you have love for one another, then everyone will know that you are my disciples.
Reach out your hand to heal, and grant that wonders and miracles may be performed through the name of your holy Servant Jesus.
But to keep me from being puffed up with pride because of the many wonderful things I saw, I was given a painful physical ailment, which acts as Satan's messenger to beat me and keep me from being proud.
And he also wanted to reveal his abundant glory, which was poured out on us who are the objects of his mercy, those of us whom he has prepared to receive his glory.
Now, God has offered us the promise that we may receive that rest he spoke about. Let us take care, then, that none of you will be found to have failed to receive that promised rest.
Instead, be concerned with his Kingdom, and he will provide you with these things.
It is about his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ: as to his humanity, he was born a descendant of David;
Give orders, then, for his tomb to be carefully guarded until the third day, so that his disciples will not be able to go and steal the body, and then tell the people that he was raised from death. This last lie would be even worse than the first one.
And you don't want new wine after drinking old wine. The old is better, you say.
For the message about Christ's death on the cross is nonsense to those who are being lost; but for us who are being saved it is God's power.
The harbor was not a good one to spend the winter in; so almost everyone was in favor of putting out to sea and trying to reach Phoenix, if possible, in order to spend the winter there. Phoenix is a harbor in Crete that faces southwest and northwest.
So get rid of your old self, which made you live as you used to -- the old self that was being destroyed by its deceitful desires.
because the truth remains in us and will be with us forever.
will themselves drink God's wine, the wine of his fury, which he has poured at full strength into the cup of his anger! All who do this will be tormented in fire and sulfur before the holy angels and the Lamb.
The Wicked One will come with the power of Satan and perform all kinds of false miracles and wonders,
He was holy and good, but you rejected him, and instead you asked Pilate to do you the favor of turning loose a murderer.
My greetings to Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who work in the Lord's service, and to my dear friend Persis, who has done so much work for the Lord.
The sight was so terrifying that Moses said, I am trembling and afraid!
I am afraid that the next time I come my God will humiliate me in your presence, and I shall weep over many who sinned in the past and have not repented of the immoral things they have done -- their lust and their sexual sins.
But they said to him, Sir, he already has ten coins!
He announced to the people, The man who will come after me is much greater than I am. I am not good enough even to bend down and untie his sandals.
Peter remembered what had happened and said to Jesus, Look, Teacher, the fig tree you cursed has died!
Simon has just explained how God first showed his care for the Gentiles by taking from among them a people to belong to him.
An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone over them. They were terribly afraid,
Some devout men buried Stephen, mourning for him with loud cries.
I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, Saul, Saul! Why do you persecute me?
The evil spirit shook the man hard, gave a loud scream, and came out of him.
And now, why wait any longer? Get up and be baptized and have your sins washed away by praying to him.
Jesus said, A day has twelve hours, doesn't it? So those who walk in broad daylight do not stumble, for they see the light of this world.
So they arrested Jesus and held him tight.
You Samaritans do not really know whom you worship; but we Jews know whom we worship, because it is from the Jews that salvation comes.
Now that we have been put right with God through faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Then you will be arrested and handed over to be punished and be put to death. Everyone will hate you because of me.
So Pilate went outside to them and asked, What do you accuse this man of?
He went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches.
And I saw the dead, great and small alike, standing before the throne. Books were opened, and then another book was opened, the book of the living. The dead were judged according to what they had done, as recorded in the books.
The God of our ancestors raised Jesus from death, after you had killed him by nailing him to a cross.
Then you are not that Egyptian fellow who some time ago started a revolution and led four thousand armed terrorists out into the desert?
If anyone tries to harm them, fire comes out of their mouths and destroys their enemies; and in this way whoever tries to harm them will be killed.
As long as it is day, we must do the work of him who sent me; night is coming when no one can work.
How can Christ and the Devil agree? What does a believer have in common with an unbeliever?
But you have a hard and stubborn heart, and so you are making your own punishment even greater on the Day when God's anger and righteous judgments will be revealed.
So Peter said to her, Why did you and your husband decide to put the Lord's Spirit to the test? The men who buried your husband are at the door right now, and they will carry you out too!
What did he do to you? they asked. How did he cure you of your blindness?
Everyone who heard of it thought about it and asked, What is this child going to be? For it was plain that the Lord's power was upon him.
Help carry one another's burdens, and in this way you will obey the law of Christ.
Simon Peter went aboard and dragged the net ashore full of big fish, a hundred and fifty-three in all; even though there were so many, still the net did not tear.
As it was in the time of Noah so shall it be in the days of the Son of Man.
After forty years had passed, an angel appeared to Moses in the flames of a burning bush in the desert near Mount Sinai.
And do not make God's Holy Spirit sad; for the Spirit is God's mark of ownership on you, a guarantee that the Day will come when God will set you free.
I in them and you in me, so that they may be completely one, in order that the world may know that you sent me and that you love them as you love me.
But Jesus did not trust himself to them, because he knew them all.
but they could not find a way to do it, because all the people kept listening to him, not wanting to miss a single word.
And again, Praise the Lord, all Gentiles; praise him, all peoples!
For God in his wisdom made it impossible for people to know him by means of their own wisdom. Instead, by means of the so-called foolish message we preach, God decided to save those who believe.
Dear friends in Corinth! We have spoken frankly to you; we have opened our hearts wide.
Of course some of them preach Christ because they are jealous and quarrelsome, but others from genuine good will.
When Jesus entered Capernaum, a Roman officer met him and begged for help:
He destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan and made his people the owners of the land.
So then, if some come to you who do not bring this teaching, do not welcome them in your homes; do not even say, Peace be with you.
He did this to dedicate the church to God by his word, after making it clean by washing it in water,
Because of our love for you we were ready to share with you not only the Good News from God but even our own lives. You were so dear to us!
And so they rejected him. Jesus said to them, A prophet is respected everywhere except in his hometown and by his own family.
Even those who practice circumcision do not obey the Law; they want you to be circumcised so that they can boast that you submitted to this physical ceremony.
If, then, we say that we have fellowship with him, yet at the same time live in the darkness, we are lying both in our words and in our actions.
They took a quick look around but did not see anyone else; only Jesus was with them.
Herod said, I had John's head cut off; but who is this man I hear these things about? And he kept trying to see Jesus.
A good person brings good things out of a treasure of good things; a bad person brings bad things out of a treasure of bad things.
Then I saw heaven open, and there was a white horse. Its rider is called Faithful and True; it is with justice that he judges and fights his battles.
But this did not happen to the one whom God raised from death.
For we ourselves were once foolish, disobedient, and wrong. We were slaves to passions and pleasures of all kinds. We spent our lives in malice and envy; others hated us and we hated them.
And I myself will show him all that he must suffer for my sake.
For David himself says in the book of Psalms, The Lord said to my Lord: Sit here at my right side
When he learned that Jesus was from the region ruled by Herod, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem at that time.
If a circumcised man has accepted God's call, he should not try to remove the marks of circumcision; if an uncircumcised man has accepted God's call, he should not get circumcised.
He looked at the people sitting around him and said, Look! Here are my mother and my brothers!
After saying this, he dismissed the meeting.
And I saw another angel coming up from the east with the seal of the living God. He called out in a loud voice to the four angels to whom God had given the power to damage the earth and the sea.
Jesus answered, I have always spoken publicly to everyone; all my teaching was done in the synagogues and in the Temple, where all the people come together. I have never said anything in secret.
The Word became a human being and, full of grace and truth, lived among us. We saw his glory, the glory which he received as the Father's only Son.
The official of the synagogue was angry that Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, so he spoke up and said to the people, There are six days in which we should work; so come during those days and be healed, but not on the Sabbath!
Some people's faith allows them to eat anything, but the person who is weak in the faith eats only vegetables.
And if some home or town will not welcome you or listen to you, then leave that place and shake the dust off your feet.
Then the second angel poured out his bowl on the sea. The water became like the blood of a dead person, and every living creature in the sea died.
Some of them were convinced by his words, but others would not believe.
I am not looking for human praise.
You will eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and you will sit on thrones to rule over the twelve tribes of Israel.
Jesus answered, Are you really ready to die for me? I am telling you the truth: before the rooster crows you will say three times that you do not know me.
He will not argue or shout, or make loud speeches in the streets.
Try to be at peace with everyone, and try to live a holy life, because no one will see the Lord without it.
and in Hades, where he was in great pain, he looked up and saw Abraham, far away, with Lazarus at his side.
Why are you amazed? the angel asked me. I will tell you the secret meaning of the woman and of the beast that carries her, the beast with seven heads and ten horns.
Jesus answered, His blindness has nothing to do with his sins or his parents' sins. He is blind so that God's power might be seen at work in him.
He has brought us by faith into this experience of God's grace, in which we now live. And so we boast of the hope we have of sharing God's glory!
will receive much more in this present age. They will receive a hundred times  more houses, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, and fields -- and persecutions as well; and in the age to come they will receive eternal life.
For God never said to any of his angels, You are my Son; today I have become your Father. Nor did God say about any angel, I will be his Father, and he will be my Son.
For even if you have ten thousand guardians in your Christian life, you have only one father. For in your life in union with Christ Jesus I have become your father by bringing the Good News to you.
to redeem those who were under the Law, so that we might become God's children.
Then the servant who had received one thousand coins came in and said, Sir, I know you are a hard man; you reap harvests where you did not plant, and you gather crops where you did not scatter seed.
How is it, then, that all of us hear them speaking in our own native languages?
Three days after Festus arrived in the province, he went from Caesarea to Jerusalem,
The next day Jesus and the three disciples went down from the hill, and a large crowd met Jesus.
During the time when Herod was king of Judea, there was a priest named Zechariah, who belonged to the priestly order of Abijah. His wife's name was Elizabeth; she also belonged to a priestly family. 
Then I looked, and there was the Lamb standing on Mount Zion; with him were , people who have his name and his Father's name written on their foreheads.
I do not claim that I have already succeeded or have already become perfect. I keep striving to win the prize for which Christ Jesus has already won me to himself.
For the scripture says, You will be a priest forever, in the priestly order of Melchizedek.
Then Peter and John placed their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
And any woman who prays or proclaims God's message in public worship with nothing on her head disgraces her husband; there is no difference between her and a woman whose head has been shaved.
Well, then, you should have deposited my money in the bank, and I would have received it all back with interest when I returned.
But you belong to God, my children, and have defeated the false prophets, because the Spirit who is in you is more powerful than the spirit in those who belong to the world.
Then the wife of Zebedee came to Jesus with her two sons, bowed before him, and asked him for a favor.
He alone is immortal; he lives in the light that no one can approach. No one has ever seen him; no one can ever see him. To him be honor and eternal power! Amen.
The men who were guarding Jesus made fun of him and beat him.
Day and night we ask him with all our heart to let us see you personally and supply what is needed in your faith.
Let us, then, always offer praise to God as our sacrifice through Jesus, which is the offering presented by lips that confess him as Lord.
While they were eating, Jesus took a piece of bread, gave a prayer of thanks, broke it, and gave it to his disciples. Take and eat it, he said; this is my body.
As Jesus and his disciples approached Jerusalem, they came to Bethphage at the Mount of Olives. There Jesus sent two of the disciples on ahead
God condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, destroying them with fire, and made them an example of what will happen to the godless.
The next day Jesus decided to go to Galilee. He found Philip and said to him, Come with me!
with these instructions: Go to the village there ahead of you. As soon as you get there, you will find a colt tied up that has never been ridden. Untie it and bring it here.
In view of all this, what can we say? If God is for us, who can be against us?
When you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then you will know that it will soon be destroyed.
Happy are you when people insult you and persecute you and tell all kinds of evil lies against you because you are my followers.
So then, about eating the food offered to idols: we know that an idol stands for something that does not really exist; we know that there is only the one God.
Rather, the real Jew is the person who is a Jew on the inside, that is, whose heart has been circumcised, and this is the work of God's Spirit, not of the written Law. Such a person receives praise from God, not from human beings.
He said to them, I am sure that you will quote this proverb to me, Doctor, heal yourself. You will also tell me to do here in my hometown the same things you heard were done in Capernaum.
Then he took the body down, wrapped it in a linen sheet, and placed it in a tomb which had been dug out of solid rock and which had never been used.
For by God's power I was made an apostle to the Gentiles, just as Peter was made an apostle to the Jews.
Give them these instructions, so that no one will find fault with them.
Now, all of this is an example for us, to warn us not to desire evil things, as they did,
Be merciful just as your Father is merciful.
Do not let anyone look down on you because you are young, but be an example for the believers in your speech, your conduct, your love, faith, and purity.
The chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowd to ask Pilate to set Barabbas free and have Jesus put to death.
But until I come, you must hold firmly to what you have.
In the same way, how will anyone understand what you are talking about if your message given in strange tongues is not clear? Your words will vanish in the air!
To our God and Father be the glory forever and ever! Amen.
Moses ordered you to circumcise your sons (although it was not Moses but your ancestors who started it), and so you circumcise a boy on the Sabbath.
Jesus got out of the boat, and when he saw the large crowd, his heart was filled with pity for them, and he healed their sick.
The apostles and the elders met together to consider this question.
It was while I was doing this that they found me in the Temple after I had completed the ceremony of purification. There was no crowd with me and no disorder.
All ate the same spiritual bread
The guards were so afraid that they trembled and became like dead men.
Peter made his appeal to them and with many other words he urged them, saying, Save yourselves from the punishment coming on this wicked people!
How happy that servant is if his master finds him doing this when he comes home!
who appeared in heavenly glory and talked with Jesus about the way in which he would soon fulfill God's purpose by dying in Jerusalem.
For they heard them speaking in strange tongues and praising God's greatness. Peter spoke up:
The Word was the source of life, and this life brought light to people.
For this reason you must obey the authorities -- not just because of God's punishment, but also as a matter of conscience.
At noon the whole country was covered with darkness, which lasted for three hours.
Since all these things will be destroyed in this way, what kind of people should you be? Your lives should be holy and dedicated to God,
God is my witness that what I say is true -- the God whom I serve with all my heart by preaching the Good News about his Son. God knows that I remember you
But when the kindness and love of God our Savior was revealed,
The four angels were released; for this very hour of this very day of this very month and year they had been kept ready to kill a third of all the human race.
John's father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit, and he spoke God's message:
I was then given a stick that looked like a measuring-rod, and was told, Go and measure the temple of God and the altar, and count those who are worshiping in the temple.
If a country divides itself into groups which fight each other, that country will fall apart.
naked and you clothed me; I was sick and you took care of me, in prison and you visited me.
But concerning Israel he says, All day long I held out my hands to welcome a disobedient and rebellious people.
And so God chose his Servant and sent him to you first, to bless you by making every one of you turn away from your wicked ways.
And as John was about to finish his mission, he said to the people, Who do you think I am? I am not the one you are waiting for. But listen! He is coming after me, and I am not good enough to take his sandals off his feet.
So they went. Then at twelve o'clock and again at three o'clock he did the same thing.
At once Jesus knew what they were thinking, so he said to them, Why do you think such things?
Happy are those who remain faithful under trials, because when they succeed in passing such a test, they will receive as their reward the life which God has promised to those who love him.
You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; rich as he was, he made himself poor for your sake, in order to make you rich by means of his poverty.
The Jewish Law is not a full and faithful model of the real things; it is only a faint outline of the good things to come. The same sacrifices are offered forever, year after year. How can the Law, then, by means of these sacrifices make perfect the people who come to God?
It is God who clothes the wild grass -- grass that is here today and gone tomorrow, burned up in the oven. Won't he be all the more sure to clothe you? What little faith you have!
For there are many, especially the converts from Judaism, who rebel and deceive others with their nonsense.
Be on your guard against false prophets; they come to you looking like sheep on the outside, but on the inside they are really like wild wolves.
Jesus noticed how wise his answer was, and so he told him, You are not far from the Kingdom of God. After this nobody dared to ask Jesus any more questions.
If others have the right to expect this from you, don't we have an even greater right? But we haven't made use of this right. Instead, we have endured everything in order not to put any obstacle in the way of the Good News about Christ.
Even the hairs of your head have all been counted. So do not be afraid; you are worth much more than many sparrows!
You yourselves admit, then, that you approve of what your ancestors did; they murdered the prophets, and you build their tombs.
Then the second one married the woman, and he also died without having children. The same thing happened to the third brother,
And there are heavenly bodies and earthly bodies; the beauty that belongs to heavenly bodies is different from the beauty that belongs to earthly bodies.
In a little while you will not see me any more, and then a little while later you will see me.
Jesus found a donkey and rode on it, just as the scripture says,
In this way he will strengthen you, and you will be perfect and holy in the presence of our God and Father when our Lord Jesus comes with all who belong to him.
May the Lord himself, who is our source of peace, give you peace at all times and in every way. The Lord be with you all.
Set your hearts, then, on the more important gifts. Best of all, however, is the following way.
He spent everything he had. Then a severe famine spread over that country, and he was left without a thing.
And besides that, he has been chosen and appointed by the churches to travel with us as we carry out this service of love for the sake of the Lord's glory and in order to show that we want to help.
But his answer was: My grace is all you need, for my power is greatest when you are weak. I am most happy, then, to be proud of my weaknesses, in order to feel the protection of Christ's power over me.
and said, Sir, have mercy on my son! He is an epileptic and has such terrible  attacks that he often falls in the fire or into water.
Peace is what I leave with you; it is my own peace that I give you. I do not give it as the world does. Do not be worried and upset; do not be afraid.
And when I was informed that there was a plot against him, at once I decided to send him to you. I have told his accusers to make their charges against him before you.
Do your best to go in through the narrow door; because many people will surely try to go in but will not be able.
They arrived at Jairus' house, where Jesus saw the confusion and heard all the loud crying and wailing.
Physical exercise has some value, but spiritual exercise is valuable in every way, because it promises life both for the present and for the future.
Then the commander called two of his officers and said, Get two hundred soldiers ready to go to Caesarea, together with seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen, and be ready to leave by nine o'clock tonight.
Now, however, you should forgive him and encourage him, in order to keep him from becoming so sad as to give up completely.
Nor does anyone pour new wine into used wineskins, for the skins will burst, the wine will pour out, and the skins will be ruined. Instead, new wine is poured into fresh wineskins, and both will keep in good condition.
Now, what does he went up mean? It means that first he came down to the lowest depths of the earth.
He will wipe away all tears from their eyes. There will be no more death, no more grief or crying or pain. The old things have disappeared.
Soon afterward Jesus went to a town named Nain, accompanied by his disciples and a large crowd.
Pilate said to them the third time, But what crime has he committed? I cannot find anything he has done to deserve death! I will have him whipped and set him free.
He said to them, You yourselves know very well that a Jew is not allowed by his religion to visit or associate with Gentiles. But God has shown me that I must not consider any person ritually unclean or defiled.
Suppose a person whose conscience is weak in this matter sees you, who have so-called knowledge, eating in the temple of an idol; will not this encourage him to eat food offered to idols?
- The passage of scripture which he was reading was this: He was like a sheep that is taken to be slaughtered, like a lamb that makes no sound when its wool is cut off. He did not say a word. He was humiliated, and justice was denied him. No one will be able to tell about his descendants, because his life on earth has come to an end.
When the Devil finished tempting Jesus in every way, he left him for a while.
He trusts in God and claims to be God's Son. Well, then, let us see if God wants to save him now!
People came to him from Jerusalem, from the whole province of Judea, and from all over the country near the Jordan River.
No, it is rather by means of God's power that I drive out demons, and this proves that the Kingdom of God has already come to you.
What shall we say, then? Should we continue to live in sin so that God's grace will increase?
The first angel went and poured out his bowl on the earth. Terrible and painful sores appeared on those who had the mark of the beast and on those who had worshiped its image.
Also in front of the throne there was what looked like a sea of glass, clear as crystal. Surrounding the throne on each of its sides, were four living creatures covered with eyes in front and behind.
Then Pilate set Barabbas free for them; and after he had Jesus whipped, he handed him over to be crucified.
When Jesus finished giving these instructions to his twelve disciples, he left that place and went off to teach and preach in the towns near there.
When they bring you to trial, do not worry about what you are going to say or how you will say it; when the time comes, you will be given what you will say.
This is what I mean, my friends. When you meet for worship, one person has a hymn, another a teaching, another a revelation from God, another a message in strange tongues, and still another the explanation of what is said. Everything must be of help to the church.
I beg you not to force me to be harsh when I come; for I am sure I can deal harshly with those who say that we act from worldly motives.
It is true that through the sin of one man death began to rule because of that one man. But how much greater is the result of what was done by the one man, Jesus Christ! All who receive God's abundant grace and are freely put right with him will rule in life through Christ.
May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.
that he promised her, I swear that I will give you anything you ask for!
Then there came from the throne the sound of a voice, saying, Praise our God, all his servants and all people, both great and small, who have reverence for him!
To conclude: you must all have the same attitude and the same feelings; love one another, and be kind and humble with one another.
for it is he who is the Yes to all of God's promises. This is why through Jesus Christ our Amen is said to the glory of God.
While Peter was wondering about the meaning of this vision, the men sent by Cornelius had learned where Simon's house was, and they were now standing in front of the gate.
Do not be surprised at this; the time is coming when all the dead will hear his voice
No one uses a piece of new cloth to patch up an old coat, because the new patch will shrink and tear off some of the old cloth, making an even bigger hole.
they saw him, but somehow did not recognize him.
The first angel blew his trumpet. Hail and fire, mixed with blood, came pouring down on the earth. A third of the earth was burned up, a third of the trees, and every blade of green grass.
I beg you, then, not to be discouraged because I am suffering for you; it is all for your benefit.
It was then that they made an idol in the shape of a bull, offered sacrifice to it, and had a feast in honor of what they themselves had made.
The words of the prophets agree completely with this. As the scripture says,
Many of those who had practiced magic brought their books together and burned them in public. They added up the price of the books, and the total came to fifty thousand silver coins.
But they would not answer him, because on the road they had been arguing among themselves about who was the greatest.
Paul went into the synagogue and for three months spoke boldly with the people, holding discussions with them and trying to convince them about the Kingdom of God.
But when the believers gathered around him, he got up and went back into the town. The next day he and Barnabas went to Derbe.
Until the time of John all the prophets and the Law of Moses spoke about the Kingdom;
At the same time, get a room ready for me, because I hope that God will answer the prayers of all of you and give me back to you.
The ax is ready to cut down the trees at the roots; every tree that does not bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown in the fire.
The people who were in the house with Mary comforting her followed her when they saw her get up and hurry out. They thought that she was going to the grave to weep there.
I call God as my witness -- he knows my heart! It was in order to spare you that I decided not to go to Corinth.
An angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right side of the altar where the incense was burned.
And all wrongdoers will be repaid for the wrong things they do, because God judges everyone by the same standard.
If your brother sins against you, go to him and show him his fault. But do it privately, just between yourselves. If he listens to you, you have won your brother back.
The night before Herod was going to bring him out to the people, Peter was sleeping between two guards. He was tied with two chains, and there were guards on duty at the prison gate.
He who comes from above is greater than all. He who is from the earth belongs to the earth and speaks about earthly matters, but he who comes from heaven is above all.
You were set free from sin and became the slaves of righteousness.
But now that you know God -- or, I should say, now that God knows you -- how is it that you want to turn back to those weak and pitiful ruling spirits? Why do you want to become their slaves all over again?
Thomas (called the Twin) said to his fellow disciples, Let us all go along with the Teacher, so that we may die with him!
I tell you, I will never again drink this wine until the day I drink the new wine with you in my Father's Kingdom.
Judas, the traitor, knew where it was, because many times Jesus had met there with his disciples.
Jesus reached out and touched him. I do want to, he answered. Be clean! At once the man was healed of his disease.
because every child of God is able to defeat the world. And we win the victory over the world by means of our faith.
In this way they will store up for themselves a treasure which will be a solid foundation for the future. And then they will be able to win the life which is true life.
The man answered, Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your strength, and with all your mind'; and Love your neighbor as you love yourself.
Have you ever known one of the authorities or one Pharisee to believe in him?
People kept coming to Jesus from one town after another; and when a great crowd gathered, Jesus told this parable:
Tell the city of Zion, Look, your king is coming to you! He is humble and rides on a donkey and on a colt, the foal of a donkey.
Once a man came to Jesus. Teacher, he asked, what good thing must I do to receive eternal life?
Philip went to the principal city in Samaria and preached the Messiah to the people there.
The attitude you should have is the one that Christ Jesus had:
Abraham believed and was blessed; so all who believe are blessed as he was.
He went on and saw two other brothers, James and John, the sons of Zebedee. They were in their boat with their father Zebedee, getting their nets ready. Jesus called them,
I took the little scroll from his hand and ate it, and it tasted sweet as honey in my mouth. But after I swallowed it, it turned sour in my stomach.
from the murder of Abel to the murder of Zechariah, who was killed between the altar and the Holy Place. Yes, I tell you, the people of this time will be punished for them all!
As for you, my son, be strong through the grace that is ours in union with Christ Jesus.
Be on your guard against him yourself, because he was violently opposed to our message.
A good person brings good out of the treasure of good things in his heart; a bad person brings bad out of his treasure of bad things. For the mouth speaks what the heart is full of.
Make certain, then, that the light in you is not darkness.
Jesus was born in the town of Bethlehem in Judea, during the time when Herod was king. Soon afterward, some men who studied the stars came from the East to Jerusalem
So Peter spoke up and said to Jesus, Lord, how good it is that we are here! If you wish, I will make three tents here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.
The angel threw him into the abyss, locked it, and sealed it, so that he could not deceive the nations any more until the thousand years were over. After that he must be set loose for a little while.
To Timothy, my true son in the faith: May God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord give you grace, mercy, and peace.
He was talking about Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. For Judas, even though he was one of the twelve disciples, was going to betray him.
You have spent enough time in the past doing what the heathen like to do. Your lives were spent in indecency, lust, drunkenness, orgies, drinking parties, and the disgusting worship of idols.
When Moses was forty years old, he decided to find out how his fellow Israelites were being treated.
I am not saying that the promise of God has failed; for not all the people of Israel are the people of God.
Whoever is evil must go on doing evil, and whoever is filthy must go on being filthy; whoever is good must go on doing good, and whoever is holy must go on being holy.
If the woman does not cover her head, she might as well cut her hair. And since it is a shameful thing for a woman to shave her head or cut her hair, she should cover her head.
Another horse came out, a red one. Its rider was given the power to bring war on the earth, so that people should kill each other. He was given a large sword.
And so be glad, you heavens, and all you that live there! But how terrible for the earth and the sea! For the Devil has come down to you, and he is filled with rage, because he knows that he has only a little time left.
I am pulled in two directions. I want very much to leave this life and be with Christ, which is a far better thing;
There will be the shout of command, the archangel's voice, the sound of God's trumpet, and the Lord himself will come down from heaven. Those who have died believing in Christ will rise to life first;
When morning came, there was a tremendous confusion among the guards -- what had happened to Peter?
So then, my friends, when you gather together to eat the Lord's Supper, wait for one another.
For our love for God means that we obey his commands. And his commands are not too hard for us,
Now, to the unmarried and to the widows I say that it would be better for you to continue to live alone as I do.
But we don't want to offend these people. So go to the lake and drop in a line. Pull up the first fish you hook, and in its mouth you will find a coin worth enough for my Temple tax and yours. Take it and pay them our taxes.
If the Spirit leads you, then you are not subject to the Law.
But the two are not the same, because God's free gift is not like Adam's sin. It is true that many people died because of the sin of that one man. But God's grace is much greater, and so is his free gift to so many people through the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ.
Teacher, they asked, when will this be? And what will happen in order to show that the time has come for it to take place?
Listen to these words, fellow Israelites! Jesus of Nazareth was a man whose divine authority was clearly proven to you by all the miracles and wonders which God performed through him. You yourselves know this, for it happened here among you.
Judas (not Judas Iscariot) said, Lord, how can it be that you will reveal yourself to us and not to the world?
Abraham said, Your brothers have Moses and the prophets to warn them; your brothers should listen to what they say.
When Simon Peter saw what had happened, he fell on his knees before Jesus and said, Go away from me, Lord! I am a sinful man!
Then Jesus said to the woman, Your sins are forgiven.
Peter followed from a distance and went into the courtyard of the High Priest's house. There he sat down with the guards, keeping himself warm by the fire.
Now turn from your sins! If you don't, I will come to you soon and fight against those people with the sword that comes out of my mouth.
I have told you this while I am still with you.
So Joseph sent a message to his father Jacob, telling him and the whole family, seventy-five people in all, to come to Egypt.
You may be sure that no one who is immoral, indecent, or greedy (for greed is a form of idolatry) will ever receive a share in the Kingdom of Christ and of God.
So they grabbed him, threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
If we declare that Jesus is the Son of God, we live in union with God and God lives in union with us.
I was ahead of most other Jews of my age in my practice of the Jewish religion, and was much more devoted to the traditions of our ancestors.
When Jesus heard what had happened, he found the man and asked him, Do you believe in the Son of Man?
So far as the Law is concerned, however, I am dead -- killed by the Law itself -- in order that I might live for God. I have been put to death with Christ on his cross,
To have faith is to be sure of the things we hope for, to be certain of the things we cannot see.
There was sin in the world before the Law was given; but where there is no law, no account is kept of sins.
which now had turned into wine, and he tasted it. He did not know where this wine had come from (but, of course, the servants who had drawn out the water knew); so he called the bridegroom
and my teaching and message were not delivered with skillful words of human wisdom, but with convincing proof of the power of God's Spirit.
Every Sunday each of you must put aside some money, in proportion to what you have earned, and save it up, so that there will be no need to collect money when I come.
Jesus spoke up and said to him, Simon, I have something to tell you. Yes, Teacher, he said, tell me.
Then the Son of Man will appear, coming in a cloud with great power and glory.
So the commander went to Paul and asked him, Tell me, are you a Roman citizen? Yes, answered Paul.
Your real life is Christ and when he appears, then you too will appear with him and share his glory!
For what is mortal must be changed into what is immortal; what will die must be changed into what cannot die.
But whoever accepts his message confirms by this that God is truthful.
One of them ran up with a sponge, soaked it in cheap wine, and put it on the end of a stick. Then he held it up to Jesus' lips and said, Wait! Let us see if Elijah is coming to bring him down from the cross! 
Do not conform yourselves to the standards of this world, but let God transform you inwardly by a complete change of your mind. Then you will be able to know the will of God -- what is good and is pleasing to him and is perfect.
But the heavenly Jerusalem is free, and she is our mother.
Their purpose is to prove that your faith is genuine. Even gold, which can be destroyed, is tested by fire; and so your faith, which is much more precious than gold, must also be tested, so that it may endure. Then you will receive praise and glory and honor on the Day when Jesus Christ is revealed.
We know that the Law is spiritual; but I am a mortal, sold as a slave to sin.
No one patches up an old coat with a piece of new cloth, for the new patch will shrink and make an even bigger hole in the coat.
For what my Father wants is that all who see the Son and believe in him should have eternal life. And I will raise them to life on the last day.
In the same way urge the young men to be self-controlled.
Then the disciples asked Jesus, Why do the teachers of the Law say that Elijah has to come first?
Your riches have rotted away, and your clothes have been eaten by moths.
We always give thanks to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you.
I do not understand what I do; for I don't do what I would like to do, but instead I do what I hate.
My dear friends, this is now the second letter I have written you. In both letters I have tried to arouse pure thoughts in your minds by reminding you of these things.
All this I do for the gospel's sake, in order to share in its blessings.
Then Jesus went up a hill and called to himself the men he wanted. They came to him,
As the Lord's servant, you must not quarrel. You must be kind toward all, a good and patient teacher,
David himself called him Lord'; so how can the Messiah be David's descendant?A large crowd was listening to Jesus gladly.
I sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
And I have been made a servant of the church by God, who gave me this task to perform for your good. It is the task of fully proclaiming his message,
One and the same Spirit gives faith to one person, while to another person he gives the power to heal.
The child grew and became strong; he was full of wisdom, and God's blessings were upon him.
Be on your guard against the teachers of the Law, who like to walk around in their long robes and love to be greeted with respect in the marketplace; who choose the reserved seats in the synagogues and the best places at feasts;
But thanks be to God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!
Let us go forward, then, to mature teaching and leave behind us the first lessons of the Christian message. We should not lay again the foundation of turning away from useless works and believing in God;
But now that I have finished my work in these regions and since I have been wanting for so many years to come to see you,
One of the teachers of the Law said to him, Teacher, when you say this, you insult us too! 
not to everyone, but only to the witnesses that God had already chosen, that is, to us who ate and drank with him after he rose from death.
It was faith that made Isaac promise blessings for the future to Jacob and Esau.
They love the best places at feasts and the reserved seats in the synagogues;
The Word was in the world, and though God made the world through him, yet the world did not recognize him.
This is what I will do in the last days, God says: I will pour out my Spirit on everyone. Your sons and daughters will proclaim my message; your young men will see visions, and your old men will have dreams.
Do not complain against one another, my friends, so that God will not judge you. The Judge is near, ready to appear.
He took Peter, James, and John with him. Distress and anguish came over him, 
Deeply moved once more, Jesus went to the tomb, which was a cave with a stone placed at the entrance.
In the same way instruct the older women to behave as women should who live a holy life. They must not be slanderers or slaves to wine. They must teach what is good,
Here we see how kind and how severe God is. He is severe toward those who have fallen, but kind to you -- if you continue in his kindness. But if you do not, you too will be broken off.
His appearing will be brought about at the right time by God, the blessed and only Ruler, the King of kings and the Lord of lords.
so Pilate questioned him again, Aren't you going to answer? Listen to all their accusations!
Jesus said to him, Foxes have holes, and birds have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lie down and rest.
But because I love you, I make a request instead. I do this even though I am Paul, the ambassador of Christ Jesus, and at present also a prisoner for his sake.
which is the secret he hid through all past ages from all human beings but has now revealed to his people.
Then Jesus went back to Cana in Galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. A government official was there whose son was sick in Capernaum.
So then, as often as we have the chance, we should do good to everyone, and especially to those who belong to our family in the faith.
The people there saw him walking and praising God,
Jesus said to them, Haven't you ever read what the Scriptures say? The stone which the builders rejected as worthless turned out to be the most important of all. This was done by the Lord; what a wonderful sight it is!
Then Jesus took a cup, gave thanks to God, and said, Take this and share it among yourselves.
So Jesus told them plainly, Lazarus is dead,
Jesus took the five loaves and two fish, looked up to heaven, thanked God for them, broke them, and gave them to the disciples to distribute to the people. 
My friends, if any of you wander away from the truth and another one brings you back again,
Very early on Sunday morning the women went to the tomb, carrying the spices they had prepared.
But some of them returned to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.
And a human being is worth much more than a sheep! So then, our Law does allow us to help someone on the Sabbath.
Listen! I have told you this ahead of time.
The shouting became louder, and some of the teachers of the Law who belonged to the party of the Pharisees stood up and protested strongly: We cannot find a thing wrong with this man! Perhaps a spirit or an angel really did speak to him!
Then the Roman soldiers with their commanding officer and the Jewish guards arrested Jesus, tied him up,
Remember your relative Elizabeth. It is said that she cannot have children, but she herself is now six months pregnant, even though she is very old.
But Paul said to the police officers, We were not found guilty of any crime, yet they whipped us in public -- and we are Roman citizens! Then they threw us in prison. And now they want to send us away secretly? Not at all! The Roman officials themselves must come here and let us out.
But they will have to give an account of themselves to God, who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
Then I saw what looked like a sea of glass mixed with fire. I also saw those who had won the victory over the beast and its image and over the one whose name is represented by a number. They were standing by the sea of glass, holding harps that God had given them
because you are receiving the salvation of your souls, which is the purpose of your faith in him.
Suppose a rich man wearing a gold ring and fine clothes comes to your meeting, and a poor man in ragged clothes also comes.
In the same way, I tell you, the angels of God rejoice over one sinner who repents.
Then they drew lots to choose between the two men, and the one chosen was Matthias, who was added to the group of eleven apostles.
The seven angels who had the seven plagues came out of the temple, dressed in clean shining linen and with gold bands tied around their chests.
May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.
For everyone who asks will receive, and anyone who seeks will find, and the door will be opened to those who knock.
We read in the Law of Moses, Do not muzzle an ox when you are using it to thresh grain. Now, is God concerned about oxen?
Jesus' mother and brothers came to him, but were unable to join him because of the crowd.
They say they are wise, but they are fools;
They would sell their property and possessions, and distribute the money among all, according to what each one needed.
He had healed many people, and all the sick kept pushing their way to him in order to touch him.
Some say that you are John the Baptist, they answered. Others say that you are Elijah, while others say that one of the prophets of long ago has come back to life.
A voice said to him, Get up, Peter; kill and eat!
When buried, it is ugly and weak; when raised, it will be beautiful and strong.
In the Scriptures it is written, By means of people speaking strange languages I will speak to my people, says the Lord. I will speak through lips of foreigners, but even then my people will not listen to me.
At the same time he was hoping that Paul would give him some money; and for this reason he would call for him often and talk with him.
Then God gave to Abraham the ceremony of circumcision as a sign of the covenant. So Abraham circumcised Isaac a week after he was born; Isaac circumcised his son Jacob, and Jacob circumcised his twelve sons, the famous ancestors of our race.
And so, my friends, as you wait for that Day, do your best to be pure and faultless in God's sight and to be at peace with him.
Our great desire is that each of you keep up your eagerness to the end, so that the things you hope for will come true.
Where do all the fights and quarrels among you come from? They come from your desires for pleasure, which are constantly fighting within you.
I always give thanks to my God for you because of the grace he has given you through Christ Jesus.
Jesus went to the territory near the town of Caesarea Philippi, where he asked his disciples, Who do people say the Son of Man is?
Jesus got into a boat, and his disciples went with him.
They purposely ignore the fact that long ago God gave a command, and the heavens and earth were created. The earth was formed out of water and by water,
Then the Wicked One will be revealed, but when the Lord Jesus comes, he will kill him with the breath from his mouth and destroy him with his dazzling presence.
Surely you know that many runners take part in a race, but only one of them wins the prize. Run, then, in such a way as to win the prize.
I am the real vine, and my Father is the gardener.
While Jesus was saying this, a messenger came from the official's house. Your daughter has died, he told Jairus; don't bother the Teacher any longer.
It was faith that made Abraham able to become a father, even though he was too old and Sarah herself could not have children. He trusted God to keep his promise.
When Jesus heard that John had been put in prison, he went away to Galilee.
Your life must be controlled by love, just as Christ loved us and gave his life for us as a sweet-smelling offering and sacrifice that pleases God.
The woman answered, You are a Jew, and I am a Samaritan -- so how can you ask me for a drink? (Jews will not use the same cups and bowls that Samaritans use.)
if it is to serve, we should serve; if it is to teach, we should teach;
For while I was with you, I made up my mind to forget everything except Jesus Christ and especially his death on the cross.
See to it, then, that no one enslaves you by means of the worthless deceit of human wisdom, which comes from the teachings handed down by human beings and from the ruling spirits of the universe, and not from Christ.
So then, my friends, how dear you are to me and how I miss you! How happy you make me, and how proud I am of you! -- this, dear friends, is how you should stand firm in your life in the Lord.
The same was true of Simon's partners, James and John, the sons of Zebedee. Jesus said to Simon, Don't be afraid; from now on you will be catching people.
I heard a loud voice speaking from the throne: Now God's home is with people! He will live with them, and they shall be his people. God himself will be with them, and he will be their God.
When the officer heard about Jesus, he sent some Jewish elders to ask him to come and heal his servant.
and was rebuked for his sin. His donkey spoke with a human voice and stopped the prophet's insane action.
He took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee. Grief and anguish came over him,
Who, then, can separate us from the love of Christ? Can trouble do it, or hardship or persecution or hunger or poverty or danger or death?
For the Holy Spirit will teach you at that time what you should say. 
I left you in Crete, so that you could put in order the things that still needed doing and appoint church elders in every town. Remember my instructions:
I beg you, my friends, to listen patiently to this message of encouragement; for this letter I have written you is not very long.
(He said this to test Philip; actually he already knew what he would do.)
Then the woman left her water jar, went back to the town, and said to the people there,
so that all will honor the Son in the same way as they honor the Father. Whoever does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him.
He answered, As you go into the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him into the house that he enters,
Demons also went out from many people, screaming, You are the Son of God! Jesus gave the demons an order and would not let them speak, because they knew he was the Messiah.
May our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus prepare the way for us to come to you!
They are like children sitting in the marketplace. One group shouts to the other, We played wedding music for you, but you wouldn't dance! We sang funeral songs, but you wouldn't cry!
Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. God forbid it, Lord! he said. That must never happen to you!
There are different ways of serving, but the same Lord is served.
So the foolish ones went off to buy some oil; and while they were gone, the bridegroom arrived. The five who were ready went in with him to the wedding feast, and the door was closed.
God did not spare the Jews, who are like natural branches; do you think he will spare you?
For John is the one of whom the scripture says: God said, I will send my messenger ahead of you to open the way for you.
I tell you, get up, pick up your mat, and go home!
But you, my friends, already know this. Be on your guard, then, so that you will not be led away by the errors of lawless people and fall from your safe position.
And you must love God with all your heart and with all your mind and with  all your strength; and you must love your neighbor as you love yourself. It is more important to obey these two commandments than to offer on the altar animals and other sacrifices to God.
If you have ears, then, listen to what the Spirit says to the churches!
like servants who are waiting for their master to come back from a wedding feast. When he comes and knocks, they will open the door for him at once.
for my people, my own flesh and blood! For their sake I could wish that I myself were under God's curse and separated from Christ.
So, my brother, please do me this favor for the Lord's sake; as a brother in Christ, cheer me up!
So Pilate asked him, Are you a king, then? Jesus answered, You say that I am a king. I was born and came into the world for this one purpose, to speak about the truth. Whoever belongs to the truth listens to me.
: To those who win the victory, who continue to the end to do what I want, I will give the same authority that I received from my Father: I will give them authority over the nations, to rule them with an iron rod and to break them to pieces like clay pots. I will also give them the morning star.
It was Caiaphas who had advised the Jewish authorities that it was better that one man should die for all the people.
And so those whom God set apart, he called; and those he called, he put right with himself, and he shared his glory with them.
No, it is not Beelzebul, but God's Spirit, who gives me the power to drive out demons, which proves that the Kingdom of God has already come upon you.
He will oppose every so-called god or object of worship and will put himself above them all. He will even go in and sit down in God's Temple and claim to be God.
But many who heard the message believed; and the number grew to about five thousand.
The smoke of the fire that torments them goes up forever and ever. There is no relief day or night for those who worship the beast and its image, for anyone who has the mark of its name.
The disciples left and traveled through all the villages, preaching the Good News and healing people everywhere.
My children, I shall not be with you very much longer. You will look for me; but I tell you now what I told the Jewish authorities, You cannot go where I am going.
And we ourselves know and believe the love which God has for us. God is love, and those who live in love live in union with God and God lives in union with them.
and stood behind Jesus, by his feet, crying and wetting his feet with her tears. Then she dried his feet with her hair, kissed them, and poured the perfume on them.
Jesus said to him, If you want to be perfect, go and sell all you have and give the money to the poor, and you will have  riches in heaven; then come and follow me.
You have heard that it was said, Do not commit adultery.
(:)
That is how it is with you, my friends. As far as the Law is concerned, you also have died because you are part of the body of Christ; and now you belong to him who was raised from death in order that we might be useful in the service of God.
Many times the evil spirit has tried to kill him by throwing him in the fire and into water. Have pity on us and help us, if you possibly can!
But some Jews were jealous and gathered worthless loafers from the streets and formed a mob. They set the whole city in an uproar and attacked the home of a man named Jason, in an attempt to find Paul and Silas and bring them out to the people.
I do not want to take up too much of your time, however, so I beg you to be kind and listen to our brief account.
While Jesus was eating, a woman came to him with an alabaster jar filled with an expensive perfume, which she poured on his head.
There at the Beautiful Gate, as it was called, was a man who had been lame all his life. Every day he was carried to the gate to beg for money from the people who were going into the Temple.
We know that God does not listen to sinners; he does listen to people who respect him and do what he wants them to do.
The Pharisees, then, asked the man again how he had received his sight. He told them, He put some mud on my eyes; I washed my face, and now I can see.
Another man, who was a disciple, said, Sir, first let me go back and bury my father.
Publius' father was in bed, sick with fever and dysentery. Paul went into his room, prayed, placed his hands on him, and healed him.
But you, friends, must not become tired of doing good.
I may give away everything I have, and even give up my body to be burned -- but if I have no love, this does me no good.
Ask, and you will receive; seek, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you.
An angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
Yes, Jesus said to them, and I assure you that anyone who leaves home or wife or brothers or parents or children for the sake of the Kingdom of God
You were at times publicly insulted and mistreated, and at other times you were ready to join those who were being treated in this way.
The Father loves me because I am willing to give up my life, in order that I may receive it back again.
They brought him one, and he asked, Whose face and name are these? The Emperor's, they answered.
That is why we ourselves boast about you in the churches of God. We boast about the way you continue to endure and believe through all the persecutions and sufferings you are experiencing.
The righteous will then answer him, When, Lord, did we ever see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you a drink?
You must remove the old yeast of sin so that you will be entirely pure. Then you will be like a new batch of dough without any yeast, as indeed I know you actually are. For our Passover Festival is ready, now that Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed.
Now, about brother Apollos. I have often encouraged him to visit you with the other believers, but he is not completely convinced that he should go at this time. When he gets the chance, however, he will go.
Jesus said to them, You are still no more intelligent than the others.
When it was decided that we should sail to Italy, they handed Paul and some other prisoners over to Julius, an officer in the Roman army regiment called The Emperor's Regiment.
If I do what I don't want to do, this means that I am no longer the one who does it; instead, it is the sin that lives in me.
Those who eat my flesh and drink my blood live in me, and I live in them.
He was then almost one hundred years old; but his faith did not weaken when he thought of his body, which was already practically dead, or of the fact that Sarah could not have children.
They were all well impressed with him and marveled at the eloquent words that he spoke. They said, Isn't he the son of Joseph?
As the scripture says, The one who gathered much did not have too much, and the one who gathered little did not have too little.
I came to set the earth on fire, and how I wish it were already kindled!
The greatest love you can have for your friends is to give your life for them.
You study the Scriptures, because you think that in them you will find eternal life. And these very Scriptures speak about me!
Work hard and do not be lazy. Serve the Lord with a heart full of devotion.
Then he took a piece of bread, gave thanks to God, broke it, and gave it to them, saying, This is my body, which is given for you. Do this in memory of me.
In great anguish he prayed even more fervently; his sweat was like drops of blood falling to the ground.
But now to continue -- the son who will receive his father's property is treated just like a slave while he is young, even though he really owns everything.
If someone asks you why you are untying it, tell him that the Master needs it.
And, so to speak, when Abraham paid the tenth, Levi (whose descendants collect the tenth) also paid it.
When the apostles learned about it, they fled to the cities of Lystra and Derbe in Lycaonia and to the surrounding territory.
Paul answered, My fellow Israelites, I did not know that he was the High Priest. The scripture says, You must not speak evil of the ruler of your people.
It also says, They will hold you up with their hands so that not even your feet will be hurt on the stones.
When the people who had gathered there to watch the spectacle saw what happened, they all went back home, beating their breasts in sorrow.
be thankful in all circumstances. This is what God wants from you in your life in union with Christ Jesus.
They came to Capernaum, and after going indoors Jesus asked his disciples, What were you arguing about on the road?
Everything is pure to those who are themselves pure; but nothing is pure to those who are defiled and unbelieving, for their minds and consciences have been defiled.
We are glad when we are weak but you are strong. And so we also pray that you will become perfect.
That decision was their own; but, as a matter of fact, they have an obligation to help them. Since the Jews shared their spiritual blessings with the Gentiles, the Gentiles ought to use their material blessings to help the Jews.
In the following instructions, however, I do not praise you, because your meetings for worship actually do more harm than good.
He went into the house of God, took the bread offered to God, ate it, and gave it also to his men. Yet it is against our Law for anyone except the priests to eat that bread. 
The ten young women woke up and trimmed their lamps.
Though Abraham was practically dead, from this one man came as many descendants as there are stars in the sky, as many as the numberless grains of sand on the seashore.
Nothing makes me happier than to hear that my children live in the truth.
So then, you will know the false prophets by what they do.
The time has come for judgment to begin, and God's own people are the first to be judged. If it starts with us, how will it end with those who do not believe the Good News from God?
Because of the crowd, however, they could not get the man to him. So they made a hole in the roof right above  the place where Jesus was. When they had made an opening, they let the man down, lying on his mat.
Finally Herodias got her chance. It was on Herod's birthday, when he gave a feast for all the top government officials, the military chiefs, and the leading citizens of Galilee.
Then the father remembered that it was at that very hour when Jesus had told him, Your son will live. So he and all his family believed.
At once Jesus reached out and grabbed hold of him and said, What little faith you have! Why did you doubt?
So when the Samaritans came to him, they begged him to stay with them, and Jesus stayed there two days.
But it is not just creation alone which groans; we who have the Spirit as the first of God's gifts also groan within ourselves as we wait for God to make us his children and set our whole being free.
Then the Lamb broke open the second seal; and I heard the second living creature say, Come!
She had a sister named Mary, who sat down at the feet of the Lord and listened to his teaching.
But if you cannot restrain your desires, go ahead and marry -- it is better to marry than to burn with passion.
Of course not! Instead, you say to him, Get my supper ready, then put on your apron and wait on me while I eat and drink; after that you may have your meal.
Woman, why are you crying? Jesus asked her. Who is it that you are looking for? She thought he was the gardener, so she said to him, If you took him away, sir, tell me where you have put him, and I will go and get him.
Do not store up riches for yourselves here on earth, where moths and rust destroy, and robbers break in and steal.
The day that Jesus made the mud and cured him of his blindness was a Sabbath.
And one of them struck the High Priest's slave and cut off his right ear.
Remember Sodom and Gomorrah, and the nearby towns, whose people acted as those angels did and indulged in sexual immorality and perversion: they suffer the punishment of eternal fire as a plain warning to all.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
Concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered together to be with him: I beg you, my friends,
In the church at Antioch there were some prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon (called the Black), Lucius (from Cyrene), Manaen (who had been brought up with Governor Herod), and Saul.
Where is he? they asked. I don't know, he answered.
Obey your leaders and follow their orders. They watch over your souls without resting, since they must give to God an account of their service. If you obey them, they will do their work gladly; if not, they will do it with sadness, and that would be of no help to you.
who take advantage of widows and rob them of their homes, and then make a show of saying long prayers! Their punishment will be all the worse!
Fourteen years later I went back to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus along with me.
and you will be blessed, because they are not able to pay you back. God will repay you on the day the good people rise from death.
Then they returned to their country by another road, since God had warned them in a dream not to go back to Herod.
So, even though I wrote that letter, it was not because of the one who did wrong or the one who was wronged. Instead, I wrote it to make plain to you, in God's sight, how deep your devotion to us really is.
But Peter answered him, May you and your money go to hell, for thinking that you can buy God's gift with money!
But Paul appealed; he asked to be kept under guard and to let the Emperor decide his case. So I gave orders for him to be kept under guard until I could send him to the Emperor.
And he said to them all, If you want to come with me, you must forget yourself, take up your cross every day, and follow me.\
I have told you this now before it all happens, so that when it does happen, you will believe.
The eyes are like a lamp for the body. If your eyes are sound, your whole body will be full of light;
What I meant was that you should not associate with a person who calls himself a believer but is immoral or greedy or worships idols or is a slanderer or a drunkard or a thief. Don't even sit down to eat with such a person.
So when Jesus heard what was being said, he left Judea and went back to Galilee;
Jesus went back across to the other side of the lake. There at the lakeside a large crowd gathered around him.
I am telling you the truth: those who hear my words and believe in him who sent me have eternal life. They will not be judged, but have already passed from death to life.
When you come, bring my coat that I left in Troas with Carpus; bring the books too, and especially the ones made of parchment.
But now I tell you: anyone who looks at a woman and wants to possess her is guilty of committing adultery with her in his heart.
They were filled with rage and began to discuss among themselves what they could do to Jesus.
Now, I told you that you have seen me but will not believe.
But the Pharisees said, It is the chief of the demons who gives Jesus the power to drive out demons.
Yes, Father, this was how you were pleased to have it happen.
Why do you look at the speck in your brother's eye, but pay no attention to the log in your own eye?
And if God's glory is revealed through him, then God will reveal the glory of the Son of Man in himself, and he will do so at once.
The king was very angry; so he sent his soldiers, who killed those murderers and burned down their city.
and said in a loud voice, Stand up straight on your feet! The man jumped up and started walking around.
What shall we say, then, of Abraham, the father of our race? What was his experience?
Jesus answered, And why do you disobey God's command and follow your own teaching?
(Actually, Jesus himself did not baptize anyone; only his disciples did.)
Then he returned and found the three disciples asleep. He said to Peter, Simon, are you asleep? Weren't you able to stay awake for even one hour?
They kept on stoning Stephen as he called out to the Lord, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!
Many of the people who had come to visit Mary saw what Jesus did, and they believed in him.
Then Jesus said to his host, When you give a lunch or a dinner, do not invite your friends or your brothers or your relatives or your rich neighbors -- for they will invite you back, and in this way you will be paid for what you did.
That is also why you pay taxes, because the authorities are working for God when they fulfill their duties.
Those Christians who are poor must be glad when God lifts them up,
You remember why I preached the gospel to you the first time; it was because I was sick.
if we say that we remain in union with God, we should live just as Jesus Christ did.
- There was a man named Joseph from Arimathea, a town in Judea. He was a good and honorable man, who was waiting for the coming of the Kingdom of God. Although he was a member of the Council, he had not agreed with their decision and action.
They arrested Jesus and took him away into the house of the High Priest; and Peter followed at a distance.
In their greed these false teachers will make a profit out of telling you made-up stories. For a long time now their Judge has been ready, and their Destroyer has been wide awake!
Be alert, stand firm in the faith, be brave, be strong.
When it was evening, Jesus came with the twelve disciples.
You hypocrite! First take the log out of your own eye, and then you will be able to see clearly to take the speck out of your brother's eye.
For the sake of this gospel I am an ambassador, though now I am in prison. Pray that I may be bold in speaking about the gospel as I should.
They said to him, We have not received any letters from Judea about you, nor have any of our people come from there with any news or anything bad to say about you.
You foolish Galatians! Who put a spell on you? Before your very eyes you had a clear description of the death of Jesus Christ on the cross!
For the person who has something will be given more, so that he will have more than enough; but the person who has nothing will have taken away from him even the little he has.
Jesus saw them and said to them, Go and let the priests examine you. On the way they were made clean.
Righteous Father! The world does not know you, but I know you, and these know that you sent me.
In the past he allowed all people to go their own way.
The jailer woke up, and when he saw the prison doors open, he thought that the prisoners had escaped; so he pulled out his sword and was about to kill himself.
Whoever is willing to do what God wants will know whether what I teach comes from God or whether I speak on my own authority.
Then they went back home and prepared the spices and perfumes for the body. On the Sabbath they rested, as the Law commanded.
Give our best wishes to the believers in Laodicea and to Nympha and the church that meets in her house.
Come to me, all of you who are tired from carrying heavy loads, and I will give you rest.
As all the people listened to him, Jesus said to his disciples,
Judas threw the coins down in the Temple and left; then he went off and hanged himself.
You yourselves are so wise, and so you gladly tolerate fools!
Let us be concerned for one another, to help one another to show love and to do good.
On his robe and on his thigh was written the name: King of kings and Lord of lords.
Isaiah said this because he saw Jesus' glory and spoke about him.
From David to the time when the people of Israel were taken into exile in Babylon, the following ancestors are listed: David, Solomon (his mother was the woman who had been Uriah's wife), Rehoboam, Abijah, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, Manasseh, Amon, Josiah, and Jehoiachin and his brothers.
At once he found his brother Simon and told him, We have found the Messiah. (This word means Christ.)
After the uproar died down, Paul called together the believers and with words of encouragement said good-bye to them. Then he left and went on to Macedonia.
There was a man in Caesarea named Cornelius, who was a captain in the Roman army regiment called The Italian Regiment.
So Peter went down and said to the men, I am the man you are looking for. Why have you come?
You put aside God's command and obey human teachings.
This is a true saying. I want you to give special emphasis to these matters, so that those who believe in God may be concerned with giving their time to doing good deeds, which are good and useful for everyone.
When he found him, he took him to Antioch, and for a whole year the two met with the people of the church and taught a large group. It was at Antioch that the believers were first called Christians.
But when you pray, go to your room, close the door, and pray to your Father, who is unseen. And your Father, who sees what you do in private, will reward you.
Then Jesus told the people this parable: There was once a man who planted a vineyard, rented it out to tenants, and then left home for a long time.
That is why I am sending him to you -- to tell you how all of us are getting along and to encourage you.
Men will hand over their own brothers to be put to death, and fathers will do the same to their children. Children will turn against their parents and have them put to death.
And he went on to say, I tell you, there are some here who will not die until they have seen the Kingdom of God come with power.
Which one of the two did what his father wanted? The older one, they answered. So Jesus said to them, I tell you: the tax collectors and the  prostitutes are going into the Kingdom of God ahead of you.
Every one of us, then, will have to give an account to God.
The whole group was pleased with the apostles' proposal, so they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit, and Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a Gentile from Antioch who had earlier been converted to Judaism.
In the meantime the people were waiting for Zechariah and wondering why he was spending such a long time in the Temple.
So it is with faith: if it is alone and includes no actions, then it is dead.
Do your best to preserve the unity which the Spirit gives by means of the peace that binds you together.
When the Lamb broke open the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
You fool! Do you want to be shown that faith without actions is useless?
You pay special attention to certain days, months, seasons, and years.
Jesus was in Bethany at the house of Simon, a man who had suffered from a dreaded skin disease. While Jesus was eating, a woman came in with an alabaster jar full of a very expensive perfume made of pure nard. She broke the jar and poured the perfume on Jesus' head.
The wind blows wherever it wishes; you hear the sound it makes, but you do not know where it comes from or where it is going. It is like that with everyone who is born of the Spirit.
The message given to our ancestors by the angels was shown to be true, and those who did not follow it or obey it received the punishment they deserved.
Everyone whom my Father gives me will come to me. I will never turn away anyone who comes to me,
You have not paid any wages to those who work in your fields. Listen to their complaints! The cries of those who gather in your crops have reached the ears of God, the Lord Almighty.
This news about Jesus went out through all the country and the surrounding territory.
We are not trying again to recommend ourselves to you; rather, we are trying to give you a good reason to be proud of us, so that you will be able to answer those who boast about people's appearance and not about their character.
But other believers, who were from Cyprus and Cyrene, went to Antioch and proclaimed the message to Gentiles also, telling them the Good News about the Lord Jesus.
This second beast performed great miracles; it made fire come down out of heaven to earth in the sight of everyone.
I know that after I leave, fierce wolves will come among you, and they will not spare the flock.
How, then, shall we escape if we pay no attention to such a great salvation? The Lord himself first announced this salvation, and those who heard him proved to us that it is true.
I baptize you with water to show that you have repented, but the one who will come after me will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. He is much greater than I am; and I am not good enough even to carry his sandals.
so that all may go well with you, and you may live a long time in the land.
Then many false prophets will appear and fool many people.
There in the Temple he found people selling cattle, sheep, and pigeons, and also the moneychangers sitting at their tables.
Jesus said to Peter, Put your sword back in its place! Do you think that I will not drink the cup of suffering which my Father has given me?
And so the promise was based on faith, in order that the promise should be guaranteed as God's free gift to all of Abraham's descendants -- not just to those who obey the Law, but also to those who believe as Abraham did. For Abraham is the spiritual father of us all;
Jesus saw the crowds and went up a hill, where he sat down. His disciples gathered around him,
The end of all things is near. You must be self-controlled and alert, to be able to pray.
Jesus of Nazareth is passing by, they told him.
Pilate spoke again to the crowd, What, then, do you want me to do with the one you call the king of the Jews?
Since this is true, how much more is accomplished by the blood of Christ! Through the eternal Spirit he offered himself as a perfect sacrifice to God. His blood will purify our consciences from useless rituals, so that we may serve the living God.
Then he said to the disciples, Where is your faith? But they were amazed and afraid, and said to one another, Who is this man? He gives orders to the winds and waves, and they obey him!
Jesus left and was going away from the Temple when his disciples came to him to call his attention to its buildings.
This calls for endurance on the part of God's people, those who obey God's commandments and are faithful to Jesus.
I want you to know that our brother Timothy has been let out of prison. If he comes soon enough, I will have him with me when I see you.
But Peter denied it again. A little while later the bystanders accused Peter again, You can't deny that you are one of them, because you, too, are from Galilee.
So we are to use our different gifts in accordance with the grace that God has given us. If our gift is to speak God's message, we should do it according to the faith that we have;
There are many different languages in the world, yet none of them is without meaning.
For it is by our faith that we are put right with God; it is by our confession that we are saved.
Wives, submit yourselves to your husbands, for that is what you should do as Christians.
If we say that we are in the light, yet hate others, we are in the darkness to this very hour.
So it is no great thing if his servants disguise themselves to look like servants of righteousness. In the end they will get exactly what their actions deserve.
Make room for us in your hearts. We have wronged no one; we have ruined no one, nor tried to take advantage of anyone.
Some of the seed fell among thorn bushes, which grew up and choked the plants.
In the past you did not know God, and so you were slaves of beings who are not gods.
He went through those regions and encouraged the people with many messages. Then he came to Achaia,
But Jesus answered, The scripture says, Human beings cannot live on bread alone, but need every word that God speaks.
Very early on Sunday morning, at sunrise, they went to the tomb.
You have heard that it was said, Love your friends, hate your enemies.
For since we have become one with him in dying as he did, in the same way we shall be one with him by being raised to life as he was.
We know what it means to fear the Lord, and so we try to persuade others. God knows us completely, and I hope that in your hearts you know me as well.
But now you must get rid of all these things: anger, passion, and hateful feelings. No insults or obscene talk must ever come from your lips.
Will you gain anything if you win the whole world but lose your life? Of course not! There is nothing you can give to regain your life.
The next day, as they were coming back from Bethany, Jesus was hungry.
Now we know that everything in the Law applies to those who live under the Law, in order to stop all human excuses and bring the whole world under God's judgment.
And so it was that the church throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria had a time of peace. Through the help of the Holy Spirit it was strengthened and grew in numbers, as it lived in reverence for the Lord.
Can't you see? His faith and his actions worked together; his faith was made perfect through his actions.
Are we really insane? It is for God's sake. Or are we sane? Then it is for your sake.
Believe in the light, then, while you have it, so that you will be the people of the light.After Jesus said this, he went off and hid himself from them.
Then he said to them, These are the very things I told you about while I was still with you: everything written about me in the Law of Moses, the writings of the prophets, and the Psalms had to come true.
Let us, then, go to him outside the camp and share his shame.
God's wisdom, however, is shown to be true by all who accept it.
You know how we had already been mistreated and insulted in Philippi before we came to you in Thessalonica. And even though there was much opposition, our God gave us courage to tell you the Good News that comes from him.
The Jews seized this man and were about to kill him. I learned that he is a Roman citizen, so I went with my soldiers and rescued him.
I advise you, then, to buy gold from me, pure gold, in order to be rich. Buy also white clothing to dress yourself and cover up your shameful nakedness. Buy also some ointment to put on your eyes, so that you may see.
for the Father himself loves you. He loves you because you love me and have believed that I came from God.
Everyone ate and had enough.
I am all the more eager, then, to send him to you, so that you will be glad again when you see him, and my own sorrow will disappear.
Simon Peter answered, You are the Messiah, the Son of the living God.
See how much the Father has loved us! His love is so great that we are called God's children -- and so, in fact, we are. This is why the world does not know us: it has not known God.
But if he does not pay attention to this, pay no attention to him.
As the scripture says, Who knows the mind of the Lord? Who is able to give him advice? We, however, have the mind of Christ.
and you must put on the new self, which is created in God's likeness and reveals itself in the true life that is upright and holy.
He was humble and walked the path of obedience all the way to death -- his death on the cross.
Your eyes are like a lamp for the body. When your eyes are sound, your whole body is full of light; but when your eyes are no good, your whole body will be in darkness.
The man on whom this miracle of healing had been performed was over forty years old.
Some of the women of our group surprised us; they went at dawn to the tomb,
They called out in a loud voice: Salvation comes from our God, who sits on the throne, and from the Lamb!
As for us, however, our boasting will not go beyond certain limits; it will stay within the limits of the work which God has set for us, and this includes our work among you.
The Pharisees heard that Jesus was winning and baptizing more disciples than John.
Above him were written these words: This is the King of the Jews.
The Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you everything and make you remember all that I have told you.
Then Jesus answered, Go away, Satan! The scripture says, Worship the Lord your God and serve only him!
He has stretched out his mighty arm and scattered the proud with all their plans.
It is God himself who makes us, together with you, sure of our life in union with Christ; it is God himself who has set us apart,
Then they began to ask among themselves which one of them it could be who was going to do this.
Why, nature itself teaches you that long hair on a man is a disgrace,
For this reason we have always prayed for you, ever since we heard about you. We ask God to fill you with the knowledge of his will, with all the wisdom and understanding that his Spirit gives.
One day when Jesus was in the Temple teaching the people and preaching the Good News, the chief priests and the teachers of the Law, together with the elders, came
As he came near Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, he sent two disciples ahead
Now that the time for faith is here, the Law is no longer in charge of us.
But I tell you who hear me: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
The man answered, What a strange thing that is! You do not know where he comes from, but he cured me of my blindness!
So Jesus said, Well, then, pay to the Emperor what belongs to the Emperor, and pay to God what belongs to God.
Receive him, then, with joy, as a believer in the Lord. Show respect to all such people as he,
then asked John, If you are not the Messiah nor Elijah nor the Prophet, why do you baptize?
So the people of this time will be punished for the murder of all the prophets killed since the creation of the world,
Then the followers of John the Baptist came to Jesus, asking, Why is it that we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples don't fast at all?
Then he said to them, If any one of you had a child or an ox that happened to fall in a well on a Sabbath, would you  not pull it out at once on the Sabbath itself?
they are wrong about what is right, because I am going to the Father and you will not see me any more;
On that same day two of Jesus' followers were going to a village named Emmaus, about seven miles from Jerusalem,
When one of the servant women saw him sitting there at the fire, she looked straight at him and said, This man too was with Jesus!
My greetings to Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and all the other Christians with them.
Love must be completely sincere. Hate what is evil, hold on to what is good.
Many of them believed his message and were baptized, and about three thousand people were added to the group that day.
Don't worry about anything, but in all your prayers ask God for what you need, always asking him with a thankful heart.
Then Jesus spoke sternly to him and sent him away at once,
When the apostles met together with Jesus, they asked him, Lord, will you at this time give the Kingdom back to Israel?
But when they recognized that he was a Jew, they all shouted together the same thing for two hours: Great is Artemis of Ephesus!
Peter answered even more strongly, I will never say that, even if I have to die with you! And all the other disciples said the same thing.
At that time the disciples came to Jesus, asking, Who is the greatest in the Kingdom of heaven?
I am not talking about all of you; I know those I have chosen. But the scripture must come true that says, The man who shared my food turned against me.
In conclusion, my friends, fill your minds with those things that are good and that deserve praise: things that are true, noble, right, pure, lovely, and honorable.
and said: Cornelius! God has heard your prayer and has taken notice of your works of charity.
If the Gentile, who is not circumcised, obeys the commands of the Law, will not God regard him as though he were circumcised?
I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If you eat this bread, you will live forever. The bread that I will give you is my flesh, which I give so that the world may live.
Whenever you go into a town and are made welcome, eat what is set before you, 
The bridegroom is the one to whom the bride belongs; but the bridegroom's friend, who stands by and listens, is glad when he hears the bridegroom's voice. This is how my own happiness is made complete.
But I haven't made use of any of these rights, nor am I writing this now in order to claim such rights for myself. I would rather die first! Nobody is going to turn my rightful boast into empty words!
In the town of Bethlehem in Judea, they answered. For this is what the prophet wrote:
Happy are those who are humble; they will receive what God has promised!
So the Pharisees left the synagogue and met at once with some members of Herod's party, and they made plans to kill Jesus.
When you pray, do not be like the hypocrites! They love to stand up and pray in the houses of worship and on the street corners, so that everyone will see them. I assure you, they have already been paid in full.
There they preached the message in Perga and then went to Attalia,
Jesus said to them, Moses wrote this law for you because you are so hard to teach. 
All who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said.
Whatever is covered up will be uncovered, and every secret will be made known.
I do not want it to appear that I am trying to frighten you with my letters.
For the power of the horses is in their mouths and also in their tails. Their tails are like snakes with heads, and they use them to hurt people.
Then the people again picked up stones to throw at him.
With him goes Onesimus, that dear and faithful friend, who belongs to your group. They will tell you everything that is happening here.
All who heard him were amazed and asked, Isn't he the one who in Jerusalem was killing those who worship that man Jesus? And didn't he come here for the very purpose of arresting those people and taking them back to the chief priests?
The kings of the earth prepared themselves, and the rulers met together against the Lord and his Messiah.
The peoples of the world will walk by its light, and the kings of the earth will bring their wealth into it.
because this people's minds are dull, and they have stopped up their ears and closed their eyes. Otherwise, their eyes would see, their ears would hear, their minds would understand, and they would turn to me, says God, and I would heal them.
He did this to make come true what the prophet had said, I will use parables when I speak to them; I will tell them things unknown since the creation of the world.
The cup we use in the Lord's Supper and for which we give thanks to God: when we drink from it, we are sharing in the blood of Christ. And the bread we break: when we eat it, we are sharing in the body of Christ.
I have gone about among all of you, preaching the Kingdom of God. And now I know that none of you will ever see me again.
They let them down and caught such a large number of fish that the nets were about to break.
We ourselves heard this voice coming from heaven, when we were with him on the holy mountain.
But you must teach what agrees with sound doctrine.
Be patient, then, my friends, until the Lord comes. See how patient farmers are as they wait for their land to produce precious crops. They wait patiently for the autumn and spring rains.
Happy are those who are persecuted because they do what God requires; the Kingdom of heaven belongs to them!
As the scripture says, For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and unite with his wife, and the two will become one.
to reveal his Son to me, so that I might preach the Good News about him to the Gentiles, I did not go to anyone for advice,
A certain silversmith named Demetrius made silver models of the temple of the goddess Artemis, and his business brought a great deal of profit to the workers.
So when the crowd gathered, Pilate asked them, Which one do you want me to set free for you? Jesus Barabbas or Jesus called the Messiah?
Then I looked, and I heard an eagle that was flying high in the air say in a loud voice, O horror! horror! How horrible it will be for all who live on earth when the sound comes from the trumpets that the other three angels must blow!
not to be so easily confused in your thinking or upset by the claim that the Day of the Lord has come. Perhaps it is thought that we said this while prophesying or preaching, or that we wrote it in a letter.
But other people are like seeds sown in good soil. They hear the message, accept it, and bear fruit: some thirty, some sixty, and some one hundred.
But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to ask, instead, that Pilate set Barabbas free for them.
Give our greetings to all your leaders and to all God's people. The believers from Italy send you their greetings.
He opened for us a new way, a living way, through the curtain -- that is, through his own body.
I passed on to you what I received, which is of the greatest importance: that Christ died for our sins, as written in the Scriptures;
Many of them were saying, He has a demon! He is crazy! Why do you listen to him?
We are not like Moses, who had to put a veil over his face so that the people of Israel would not see the brightness fade and disappear.
The natives there were very friendly to us. It had started to rain and was cold, so they built a fire and made us all welcome.
But do not treat them as enemies; instead, warn them as believers.
However, as the scripture says, What no one ever saw or heard, what no one ever thought could happen, is the very thing God prepared for those who love him.
You yourselves used to be in the darkness, but since you have become the Lord's people, you are in the light. So you must live like people who belong to the light,
When the crowds heard about it, they followed him. He welcomed them, spoke to them about the Kingdom of God, and healed those who needed it.
He wished he could fill himself with the bean pods the pigs ate, but no one gave him anything to eat.
who choose the reserved seats in the synagogues and the best places at feasts.
Everyone speaks well of Demetrius; truth itself speaks well of him. And we add our testimony, and you know that what we say is true.
After he said this, Jesus spat on the ground and made some mud with the spittle; he rubbed the mud on the man's eyes
Jesus spent those days teaching in the Temple, and when evening came, he would go out and spend the night on the Mount of Olives.
When day came, the elders, the chief priests, and the teachers of the Law met together, and Jesus was brought before the Council.
Now, I assure you that wherever the gospel is preached all over the world, what she has done will be told in memory of her.
because I know that by means of your prayers and the help which comes from the Spirit of Jesus Christ I shall be set free.
Next day the crowd which had stayed on the other side of the lake realized that there had been only one boat there. They knew that Jesus had not gone in it with his disciples, but that they had left without him.
I wish you would tolerate me, even when I am a bit foolish. Please do!
Behind the second curtain was the tent called the Most Holy Place.
Two women will be at a mill grinding meal: one will be taken away, the other will be left behind.
For if you want to save your own life, you will lose it; but if you lose your life for my sake, you will find it.
The angel came to her and said, Peace be with you! The Lord is with you and has greatly blessed you! 
Jesus left that place, and as he walked along, he saw a tax collector, named Matthew, sitting in his office. He said to him, Follow me. Matthew got up and followed him.
Once there were seven brothers; the oldest got married and died without having children.
Then they sent to him some of their disciples and some members of Herod's party. Teacher, they said, we know that you tell the truth. You teach the truth about God's will for people, without worrying about what others think, because you pay no attention to anyone's status. 
So, if you think of me as your partner, welcome him back just as you would welcome me.
When he was made perfect, he became the source of eternal salvation for all those who obey him,
So I thought it was necessary to urge these believers to go to you ahead of me and get ready in advance the gift you promised to make. Then it will be ready when I arrive, and it will show that you give because you want to, not because you have to.
Early in the morning Jesus was taken from Caiaphas' house to the governor's palace. The Jewish authorities did not go inside the palace, for they wanted to keep themselves ritually clean, in order to be able to eat the Passover meal.
I write to you, my children, because your sins are forgiven for the sake of Christ.
So Herod called the visitors from the East to a secret meeting and found out from them the exact time the star had appeared.
God has made us what we are, and in our union with Christ Jesus he has created us for a life of good deeds, which he has already prepared for us to do.
As the time drew near when Jesus would be taken up to heaven, he made up his mind and set out on his way to Jerusalem.
I tell you, then, the great love she has shown proves that her many sins have been forgiven. But whoever has been forgiven little shows only a little love.
and so do my co-workers Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke.
sold a field he owned, brought the money, and turned it over to the apostles.
Then he appeared to more than five hundred of his followers at once, most of whom are still alive, although some have died.
The angel said, Do not harm the earth, the sea, or the trees, until we mark the servants of our God with a seal on their foreheads.
Everyone there was crying and mourning for the child. Jesus said, Don't cry; the child is not dead -- she is only sleeping!
Go along with them and join them in the ceremony of purification and pay their expenses; then they will be able to shave their heads. In this way everyone will know that there is no truth in any of the things that they have been told about you, but that you yourself live in accordance with the Law of Moses.
Keep on praying for us. We are sure we have a clear conscience, because we want to do the right thing at all times.
Not even the chief angel Michael did this. In his quarrel with the Devil, when they argued about who would have the body of Moses, Michael did not dare condemn the Devil with insulting words, but said, The Lord rebuke you!
May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.
Again I looked, and I heard angels, thousands and millions of them! They stood around the throne, the four living creatures, and the elders,
Because I preach the Good News, I suffer and I am even chained like a criminal. But the word of God is not in chains,
Just as we have a share in Christ's many sufferings, so also through Christ we share in God's great help.
As Jesus was getting into the boat, the man who had had the demons begged him, Let me go with you!
and called out in a loud voice that sounded like the roar of lions. After he had called out, the seven thunders answered with a roar.
It was about three o'clock one afternoon when he had a vision, in which he clearly saw an angel of God come in and say to him, Cornelius!
Then the chief priests and the elders met together in the palace of Caiaphas, the High Priest,
May the Lord make your love for one another and for all people grow more and more and become as great as our love for you.
Where is your father? they asked him. You know neither me nor my Father, Jesus answered. If you knew me, you would know my Father also.
In a little while the world will see me no more, but you will see me; and because I live, you also will live.
You have no part or share in our work, because your heart is not right in God's sight.
When they went back into the house, the disciples asked Jesus about this matter.
They arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail.
and lived among the tombs. Nobody could keep him tied with chains any more;
Whatever is hidden away will be brought out into the open, and whatever is covered up will be found and brought to light.
Remind your people to submit to rulers and authorities, to obey them, and to be ready to do good in every way.
For there is nothing that God cannot do.
On her forehead was written a name that has a secret meaning: Great Babylon, the mother of all prostitutes and perverts in the world.
But Festus wanted to gain favor with the Jews, so he asked Paul, Would you be willing to go to Jerusalem and be tried on these charges before me there?
the blast of a trumpet, and the sound of a voice. When the people heard the voice, they begged not to hear another word,
Can any of you live a bit longer by worrying about it?
Elijah is indeed coming first, answered Jesus, and he will get everything ready.
From such terrible dangers of death he saved us, and will save us; and we have placed our hope in him that he will save us again,
A woman who had suffered from severe bleeding for twelve years came up behind Jesus and touched the edge of his cloak.
The chief priests said to Pilate, Do not write The King of the Jews, but rather, This man said, I am the King of the Jews.
When some Pharisees gathered together, Jesus asked them,
Repent, then, of this evil plan of yours, and pray to the Lord that he will forgive you for thinking such a thing as this.
The woman fled to the desert, to a place God had prepared for her, where she will be taken care of for ,  days.
When did this take place? Was it before or after Abraham was circumcised? It was before, not after.
Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came to me and said, Come, and I will show you how the famous prostitute is to be punished, that great city that is built near many rivers.
I think it only right for me to stir up your memory of these matters as long as I am still alive.
Paul and Silas traveled on through Amphipolis and Apollonia and came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue.
They beat him over the head with a stick, spat on him, fell on their knees, and bowed down to him.
A healthy tree does not bear bad fruit, nor does a poor tree bear good fruit.
Now listen to me, you that say, Today or tomorrow we will travel to a certain city, where we will stay a year and go into business and make a lot of money.
And now I am coming to you, and I say these things in the world so that they might have my joy in their hearts in all its fullness.
In two days, as you know, it will be the Passover Festival, and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified.
The soldiers took Jesus inside to the courtyard of the governor's palace and called together the rest of the company.
He serves as high priest in the Most Holy Place, that is, in the real tent which was put up by the Lord, not by human hands.
Instead, this is what the prophet Joel spoke about:
Indeed, I tell you, the master will put that servant in charge of all his property.
Until I come, give your time and effort to the public reading of the Scriptures and to preaching and teaching.
So they left, disagreeing among themselves, after Paul had said this one thing: How well the Holy Spirit spoke through the prophet Isaiah to your ancestors!
That is why we were encouraged. Not only were we encouraged; how happy Titus made us with his happiness over the way in which all of you helped to cheer him up!
He gave to each one according to his ability: to one he gave five thousand gold coins, to another he gave two thousand, and to another he gave one thousand. Then he left on his trip.
and he will bring back many of the people of Israel to the Lord their God.
Cornelius said, It was about this time three days ago that I was praying in my house at three o'clock in the afternoon. Suddenly a man dressed in shining clothes stood in front of me
Then the apostles and the elders, together with the whole church, decided to choose some men from the group and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. They chose two men who were highly respected by the believers, Judas, called Barsabbas, and Silas,
After this I heard what sounded like the roar of a large crowd of people in heaven, saying, Praise God! Salvation, glory, and power belong to our God!
But the ship hit a sandbank and went aground; the front part of the ship got stuck and could not move, while the back part was being broken to pieces by the violence of the waves.
I would like you to be free from worry. An unmarried man concerns himself with the Lord's work, because he is trying to please the Lord.
Again Jesus asked them, Who is it you are looking for? Jesus of Nazareth, they said.
John said to him, Teacher, we saw a man who was driving out demons in your name, and we told him to stop, because he doesn't belong to our group.
I, who am an elder myself, appeal to the church elders among you. I am a witness of Christ's sufferings, and I will share in the glory that will be revealed. I appeal to you
Or would you give him a snake when he asks for a fish?
So there is no difference between Jews and Gentiles, between slaves and free people, between men and women; you are all one in union with Christ Jesus.
For I tell you that the scripture which says, He shared the fate of criminals, must come true about me, because what was written about me is coming true.
The commander wanted to find out for sure what the Jews were accusing Paul of; so the next day he had Paul's chains taken off and ordered the chief priests and the whole Council to meet. Then he took Paul and made him stand before them.
Lord, they have killed your prophets and torn down your altars; I am the only one left, and they are trying to kill me.
Sir, she answered, even the dogs under the table eat the children's leftovers!
For the scripture says, As surely as I am the living God, says the Lord, everyone will kneel before me, and everyone will confess that I am God.
and stayed and worked with them, because he earned his living by making tents, just as they did.
saying, Amen! Praise, glory, wisdom, thanksgiving, honor, power, and might belong to our God forever and ever! Amen!
he must be able to manage his own family well and make his children obey him with all respect.
I don't have to limit myself to these everyday examples, because the Law says the same thing.
I know a certain Christian man who fourteen years ago was snatched up to the highest heaven (I do not know whether this actually happened or whether he had a vision -- only God knows).
said, Prophesy for us, Messiah! Guess who hit you!
From Abraham to King David, the following ancestors are listed: Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah and his brothers; then Perez and Zerah (their mother was Tamar), Hezron, Ram, Amminadab, Nahshon, Salmon, Boaz (his mother was Rahab), Obed (his mother was Ruth), Jesse, and King David.
The disciples did as Jesus had told them and prepared the Passover meal.
Watch out, for there will be those who will arrest you and take you to court, and they will whip you in the synagogues.
So then, whether it came from me or from them, this is what we all preach, and this is what you believe.
For we are all partners with Christ if we hold firmly to the end the confidence we had at the beginning.
He sent his servants to tell the invited guests to come to the feast, but they did not want to come.
These, then, will be sent off to eternal punishment, but the righteous will go to eternal life.
May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Listen, friend, the owner answered one of them, I have not cheated you. After all, you agreed to do a day's work for one silver coin.
You are the children of your father, the Devil, and you want to follow your father's desires. From the very beginning he was a murderer and has never been on the side of truth, because there is no truth in him. When he tells a lie, he is only doing what is natural to him, because he is a liar and the father of all lies.
The weapons we use in our fight are not the world's weapons but God's powerful weapons, which we use to destroy strongholds. We destroy false arguments;
The woman realized what had happened to her, so she came, trembling with fear, knelt at his feet, and told him the whole truth.
I will give you all this power and all this wealth, the Devil told him. It has all been handed over to me, and I can give it to anyone I choose.
He said this and then stayed on in Galilee.
When Pilate heard this, he tried to find a way to set Jesus free. But the crowd shouted back, If you set him free, that means that you are not the Emperor's friend! Anyone who claims to be a king is a rebel against the Emperor!
and went back to his hometown. He taught in the synagogue, and those who heard him were amazed. Where did he get such wisdom? they asked. And what about his miracles?
Friend, how did you get in here without wedding clothes? the king asked him. But the man said nothing.
While the women went on their way, some of the soldiers guarding the tomb went back to the city and told the chief priests everything that had happened.
It was winter, and the Festival of the Dedication of the Temple was being celebrated in Jerusalem.
All of this took about  years. After this he gave them judges until the time of the prophet Samuel.
In the same way, when working with Gentiles, I live like a Gentile, outside the Jewish Law, in order to win Gentiles. This does not mean that I don't obey God's law; I am really under Christ's law.
Do those things that will show that you have turned from your sins.
Go and call your husband, Jesus told her, and come back.
and cinnamon, spice, incense, myrrh, and frankincense; wine and oil, flour and wheat, cattle and sheep, horses and carriages, slaves, and even human lives.
What answer did God give him? I have kept for myself seven thousand men who have not worshiped the false god Baal.
No, not seven times, answered Jesus, but seventy times seven,
I know what it is to be in need and what it is to have more than enough. I have learned this secret, so that anywhere, at any time, I am content, whether I am full or hungry, whether I have too much or too little.
So don't be all upset, always concerned about what you will eat and drink.
Those things, which are copies of the heavenly originals, had to be purified in that way. But the heavenly things themselves require much better sacrifices.
Then some of the Pharisees in the crowd spoke to Jesus. Teacher, they said, command your disciples to be quiet!
For we conclude that a person is put right with God only through faith, and not by doing what the Law commands.
God did not then give Abraham any part of it as his own, not even a square foot of ground, but God promised to give it to him, and that it would belong to him and to his descendants. At the time God made this promise, Abraham had no children.
There you will stay, I tell you, until you pay the last penny of your fine.
I have much more to tell you, but now it would be too much for you to bear.
And what about the seven loaves for the four thousand men? How many baskets did you fill?
I did boast of you to him, and you have not disappointed me. We have always spoken the truth to you, and in the same way the boast we made to Titus has proved true.
Masters, be fair and just in the way you treat your slaves. Remember that you too have a Master in heaven.
[When they heard this, they all left, one by one, the older ones first. Jesus was left alone, with the woman still standing there.]
Simon saw that the Spirit had been given to the believers when the apostles placed their hands on them. So he offered money to Peter and John,
The word of the Lord spread everywhere in that region.
Then all the people from that territory asked Jesus to go away, because they were terribly afraid. So Jesus got into the boat and left.
And Isaiah is even bolder when he says, I was found by those who were not looking for me; I appeared to those who were not asking for me.
So do not be afraid of people. Whatever is now covered up will be uncovered, and every secret will be made known.
[In our Law Moses commanded that such a woman must be stoned to death. Now, what do you say?]
But God finds fault with his people when he says, The days are coming, says the Lord, when I will draw up a new covenant with the people of Israel and with the people of Judah.
Then Pilate handed Jesus over to them to be crucified.So they took charge of Jesus.
Then she turned around and saw Jesus standing there; but she did not know that it was Jesus.
By then a strong wind was blowing and stirring up the water.
Jesus and his disciples were at supper. The Devil had already put into the heart of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, the thought of betraying Jesus.
He said, The God of our ancestors has chosen you to know his will, to see his righteous Servant, and to hear him speaking with his own voice.
The scripture says, It is kindness that I want, not animal sacrifices. If you really knew what this means, you would not condemn people who are not guilty;
I believe, Lord! the man said, and knelt down before Jesus.
The next Sabbath nearly everyone in the town came to hear the word of the Lord.
Soon the servant said, Your order has been carried out, sir, but there is room for more.
This plan, which God will complete when the time is right, is to bring all creation together, everything in heaven and on earth, with Christ as head.
I appeal to you, my friends, as strangers and refugees in this world! Do not give in to bodily passions, which are always at war against the soul.
This is the list of the ancestors of Jesus Christ, a descendant of David, who was a descendant of Abraham.
For John is the one of whom the scripture says: God said, I will send my messenger ahead of you to open the way for you.
It was the same with the prostitute Rahab. She was put right with God through her actions, by welcoming the Israelite spies and helping them to escape by a different road.
So Jesus went with them. He was not far from the house when the officer sent friends to tell him, Sir, don't trouble yourself. I do not deserve to have you come into my house,
Keep your lives free from the love of money, and be satisfied with what you have. For God has said, I will never leave you; I will never abandon you.
Then he said to those who were standing there, Take the gold coin away from him and give it to the servant who has ten coins.
It was on the basis of the levitical priesthood that the Law was given to the people of Israel. Now, if the work of the levitical priests had been perfect, there would have been no need for a different kind of priest to appear, one who is in the priestly order of Melchizedek, not of Aaron.
When the crowds heard this, they were amazed at his teaching.
The servant went back and told all this to his master. The master was furious and said to his servant, Hurry out to the streets and alleys of the town, and bring back the poor, the crippled, the blind, and the lame.
you are to hand this man over to Satan for his body to be destroyed, so that his spirit may be saved in the Day of the Lord.
So then, my friends, because of God's great mercy to us I appeal to you: Offer yourselves as a living sacrifice to God, dedicated to his service and pleasing to him. This is the true worship that you should offer.
I am sure, as I write this, that you will do what I ask -- in fact I know that you will do even more.
Thanks be to God, who does this through our Lord Jesus Christ! This, then, is my condition: on my own I can serve God's law only with my mind, while my human nature serves the law of sin.
For if you want to save your own life, you will lose it, but if you lose your life for my sake, you will save it.
But Jesus said, Judas, is it with a kiss that you betray the Son of Man?
This is what God said to him: Your descendants will live in a foreign country, where they will be slaves and will be badly treated for four hundred years.
Jesus answered him, So you say. But I tell all of you: from this time on you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right side of the Almighty and coming on the clouds of heaven!
They said to her, But you don't have any relative with that name!
they knew from experience that God's word is good, and they had felt the powers of the coming age.
because God had decided on an even better plan for us. His purpose was that only in company with us would they be made perfect.
Jesus was in the back of the boat, sleeping with his head on a pillow. The disciples woke him up and said, Teacher, don't you care that we are about to die?
But he said to them, I must preach the Good News about the Kingdom of  God in other towns also, because that is what God sent me to do.
Then, if anyone says to you, Look, here is the Messiah! or There he is!' -- do not believe it.
For God has revealed his grace for the salvation of all people.
while the wise ones took containers full of oil for their lamps.
Don't take a purse or a beggar's bag or shoes; don't stop to greet anyone on the road.
The rain poured down, the rivers flooded over, and the wind blew hard against that house. But it did not fall, because it was built on rock.
Anyone who does not obey that prophet shall be separated from God's people and destroyed.
Jesus continued, Now to what can I compare the people of this day? What are they like?
Upon receiving this order, the jailer threw them into the inner cell and fastened their feet between heavy blocks of wood.
Then they spat in his face and beat him; and those who slapped him
My food, Jesus said to them, is to obey the will of the one who sent me and to finish the work he gave me to do.
Remember that the Lord will reward each of us, whether slave or free, for the good work we do.
And eternal life means to know you, the only true God, and to know Jesus Christ, whom you sent.
So we are even more confident of the message proclaimed by the prophets. You will do well to pay attention to it, because it is like a lamp shining in a dark place until the Day dawns and the light of the morning star shines in your hearts.
I am telling you the truth: a grain of wheat remains no more than a single grain unless it is dropped into the ground and dies. If it does die, then it produces many grains.
As for Titus, he is my partner and works with me to help you; as for the other brothers who are going with him, they represent the churches and bring glory to Christ.
And the flesh of living beings is not all the same kind of flesh; human beings have one kind of flesh, animals another, birds another, and fish another.
But Jesus knew what they were thinking, so he said to them, Any country that divides itself into groups which fight each other will not last very long; a family divided against itself falls apart.
It will be like this at the end of the age: the angels will go out and gather up the evil people from among the good
As he rode on, people spread their cloaks on the road.
Jesus told them this parable, but they did not understand what he meant.
A few days later Jesus went back to Capernaum, and the news spread that he was at home.
If anyone supposes he is God's messenger or has a spiritual gift, he must realize that what I am writing to you is the Lord's command.
I love you just as the Father loves me; remain in my love.
Our friends, the same things happened to you that happened to the churches of God in Judea, to the people there who belong to Christ Jesus. You suffered the same persecutions from your own people that they suffered from the Jews,
Anyone who disobeys the Law of Moses is put to death without any mercy when judged guilty from the evidence of two or more witnesses.
He purifies people from their sins, and both he and those who are made pure all have the same Father. That is why Jesus is not ashamed to call them his family.
While Jesus was saying this, a Jewish official came to him, knelt down before him, and said, My daughter has just died; but come and place your hands on her, and she will live.
But if you look closely into the perfect law that sets people free, and keep on paying attention to it and do not simply listen and then forget it, but put it into practice -- you will be blessed by God in what you do.
And so there is no division in the body, but all its different parts have the same concern for one another.
You will see The Awful Horror of which the prophet Daniel spoke. It will be standing in the holy place. (Note to the reader: understand what this means!)
(I use everyday language because of the weakness of your natural selves.) At one time you surrendered yourselves entirely as slaves to impurity and wickedness for wicked purposes. In the same way you must now surrender yourselves entirely as slaves of righteousness for holy purposes.
Some Pharisees saw this and asked his disciples, Why does your teacher eat with such people?
Peter spoke up and said to Jesus, Teacher, how good it is that we are here! We will make three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.
As the scripture says, Those who were not told about him will see, and those who have not heard will understand.
For if what God promises is to be given to those who obey the Law, then faith means nothing and God's promise is worthless.
Then the disciples in the boat worshiped Jesus. Truly you are the Son of God! they exclaimed.
Now, Lord, you have kept your promise, and you may let your servant go in peace.
When Joseph and Mary had finished doing all that was required by the Law of the Lord, they returned to their hometown of Nazareth in Galilee.
But Jesus kept quiet. Again the High Priest spoke to him, In the name of the living God I now put you under oath: tell us if you are the Messiah, the Son of God.
Much, indeed, in every way! In the first place, God trusted his message to the Jews.
When he arrived at the place, he said to them, Pray that you will not fall into temptation.
If we are tempted by such trials, we must not say, This temptation comes from God. For God cannot be tempted by evil, and he himself tempts no one.
Then some Pharisees and teachers of the Law came from Jerusalem to Jesus and asked him,
I tell you, however, that Elijah has already come and that people treated him just as they pleased, as the Scriptures say about him.
And he went on to say to them all, Watch out and guard yourselves from every kind of greed; because your true life is not made up of the things you own, no matter how rich you may be.
So they asked Jesus to leave their territory.
Then Jesus returned to Galilee, and the power of the Holy Spirit was with him. The news about him spread throughout all that territory.
That is why Abraham, through faith, was accepted as righteous by God.
A man whose legs and arms were swollen came to Jesus,
I am writing this to you about those who are trying to deceive you.
After spending forty days and nights without food, Jesus was hungry.
So then, if we have food and clothes, that should be enough for us.
Then Jesus called the crowd to him and said to them, Listen and understand!
A large crowd followed him, because they had seen his miracles of healing the sick.
When an evil spirit goes out of a person, it travels over dry country looking for a place to rest. If it can't find   one, it says to itself, I will go back to my house.
The festival was nearly half over when Jesus went to the Temple and began teaching.
The news about him spread through the whole country of Syria, so that people brought to him all those who were sick, suffering from all kinds of diseases and disorders: people with demons, and epileptics, and paralytics -- and Jesus healed them all.
Food, however, will not improve our relation with God; we shall not lose anything if we do not eat, nor shall we gain anything if we do eat.
Then Jesus said to his disciples, Why are you frightened? Do you still have no faith?
and at once they left the boat and their father, and went with him.
they begged us and pleaded for the privilege of having a part in helping God's people in Judea.
After spending some time there, he left and went through the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the believers.
Finally, our friends, you learned from us how you should live in order to please God. This is, of course, the way you have been living. And now we beg and urge you in the name of the Lord Jesus to do even more.
How evil and godless are the people of this day! You ask me for a miracle? No! The only miracle you will be given is the miracle of Jonah. So he left them and went away.
If you think you are something when you really are nothing, you are only deceiving yourself.
But Abraham said, If they will not listen to Moses and the prophets, they will not be convinced even if someone were to rise from death.
So he sent another slave; but the tenants beat him also, treated him shamefully, and sent him back without a thing.
Now, when all the dead rise to life on the day of resurrection, whose wife will she be? All seven of them had married her.
the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon,
because their minds are dull, and they have stopped up their ears and have closed their eyes. Otherwise, their eyes would see, their ears would hear, their minds would understand, and they would turn to me, says God, and I would heal them.
Certainly not! I don't know you, the bridegroom answered.
Even the bandits who had been crucified with him insulted him in the same way.
Listen, he told them, we are going up to Jerusalem, where the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and the teachers of the Law. They will condemn him to death
It is at night when people sleep; it is at night when they get drunk.
For Christ died for sins once and for all, a good man on behalf of sinners, in order to lead you to God. He was put to death physically, but made alive spiritually,
Jesus looked straight at them and answered, This is impossible for human beings but not for God; everything is possible for God.
Then Jesus and his disciples went on to another village.
Some people brought their babies to Jesus for him to place his hands on them. The disciples saw them and scolded them for doing so,
Then the commander wrote a letter that went like this:
And because of God's gracious gift to me I say to every one of you: Do not think of yourself more highly than you should. Instead, be modest in your thinking, and judge yourself according to the amount of faith that God has given you.
What I mean is that both you and I will be helped at the same time, you by my faith and I by yours.
Marriage is to be honored by all, and husbands and wives must be faithful to each other. God will judge those who are immoral and those who commit adultery.
I pray that they may all be one. Father! May they be in us, just as you are in me and I am in you. May they be one, so that the world will believe that you sent me.
From James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ: Greetings to all God's people scattered over the whole world.
So you became an example to all believers in Macedonia and Achaia.
the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Kenan,
You have been made clean already by the teaching I have given you.
The prophets wrote, Everyone will be taught by God. Anyone who hears the Father and learns from him comes to me.
or to heal diseases or to speak in strange tongues or to explain what is said.
You also must be patient. Keep your hopes high, for the day of the Lord's coming is near.
Which do you prefer? Shall I come to you with a whip, or in a spirit of love and gentleness?
with these instructions: Go to the village there ahead of you; as you go in, you will find a colt tied up that has never been ridden. Untie it and bring it here.
but the word of the Lord remains forever. This word is the Good News that was proclaimed to you.
They answered him, Our father is Abraham. If you really were Abraham's children, Jesus replied, you would do the same things that he did.
I tell you, he replied, that to those who have something, even more will be given; but those who have nothing, even the little that they have will be taken away from them.
God has not rejected his people, whom he chose from the beginning. You know what the scripture says in the passage where Elijah pleads with God against Israel:
After sunset all who had friends who were sick with various diseases brought them to Jesus; he placed his hands on every one of them and healed them all.
Take the stone away! Jesus ordered. Martha, the dead man's sister, answered, There will be a bad smell, Lord. He has been buried four days!
And he said to Jesus, Remember me, Jesus, when you come as King!
The promises of God through his prophets are for you, and you share in the covenant which God made with your ancestors. As he said to Abraham, Through your descendants I will bless all the people on earth.
But the news about Jesus spread all the more widely, and crowds of people came to hear him and be healed from their diseases.
But the gardener answered, Leave it alone, sir, just one more year; I will dig around it and put in some fertilizer.
From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by order of God our Savior and Christ Jesus our hope --
And if any take anything away from the prophetic words of this book, God will take away from them their share of the fruit of the tree of life and of the Holy City, which are described in this book.
But I have prayed for you, Simon, that your faith will not fail. And when you turn back to me, you must strengthen your brothers.
Then he went back upstairs, broke bread, and ate. After talking with them for a long time, even until sunrise, Paul left.
For we cannot do a thing against the truth, but only for it.
Can any of you live a bit longer by worrying about it?
Yes, Jesus said to them, and I tell you that those who leave home or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for me and for the gospel,
(The name of the star is Bitterness.) A third of the water turned bitter, and many people died from drinking the water, because it had turned bitter.
You have been given the secret of the Kingdom of God, Jesus answered. But the others, who are on the outside, hear all things by means of parables,
They have always known, if they are willing to testify, that from the very first I have lived as a member of the strictest party of our religion, the Pharisees.
But Peter and John answered them, You yourselves judge which is right in God's sight -- to obey you or to obey God.
How terrible it will be for you, Chorazin! How terrible for you too, Bethsaida! If the miracles which were performed in you had been performed in Tyre and Sidon, the people there would have long ago sat down, put on sackcloth, and sprinkled ashes on themselves, to show that they had turned from their sins!
At that time a man named Barabbas was in prison with the rebels who had committed murder in the riot.
We always thank God for you all and always mention you in our prayers.
Some of it fell on rocky ground, where there was little soil. The seeds soon sprouted, because the soil wasn't deep.
What gives life is God's Spirit; human power is of no use at all. The words I have spoken to you bring God's life-giving Spirit.
You call him Father, when you pray to God, who judges all people by the same standard, according to what each one has done; so then, spend the rest of your lives here on earth in reverence for him.
[After the Lord Jesus had talked with them, he was taken up to heaven and sat at the right side of God.]
Their chests were covered with what looked like iron breastplates, and the sound made by their wings was like the noise of many horse-drawn chariots rushing into battle.
Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
After this, Paul left Athens and went on to Corinth.
At once the man got up in front of them all, took the bed he had been lying on, and went home, praising God.
Christ did this in order that the blessing which God promised to Abraham might be given to the Gentiles by means of Christ Jesus, so that through faith we might receive the Spirit promised by God.
and then hand him over to the Gentiles, who will make fun of him, whip him, and crucify him; but three days later he will be raised to life.
So if you are about to offer your gift to God at the altar and there you remember that your brother has something against you,
So we are always full of courage. We know that as long as we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord's home.
All of this proves that God's judgment is just and as a result you will become worthy of his Kingdom, for which you are suffering.
They were waiting for him to swell up or suddenly fall down dead. But after waiting for a long time and not seeing anything unusual happening to him, they changed their minds and said, He is a god!
But many in the crowd believed in him and said, When the Messiah comes, will he perform more miracles than this man has?
Then death and the world of the dead were thrown into the lake of fire. (This lake of fire is the second death.)
but the dragon was defeated, and he and his angels were not allowed to stay in heaven any longer.
One day when many tax collectors and other outcasts came to listen to Jesus,
From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by God's will, and from our brother Timothy -- To the church of God in Corinth, and to all God's people throughout Achaia:
Those who live as their human nature tells them to, have their minds controlled by what human nature wants. Those who live as the Spirit tells them to, have their minds controlled by what the Spirit wants.
Nicodemus, who at first had gone to see Jesus at night, went with Joseph, taking with him about one hundred pounds of spices, a mixture of myrrh and aloes.
Jesus answered, For a long time I have been with you all; yet you do not know me, Philip? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. Why, then, do you say, Show us the Father?
They will whip him and kill him, but three days later he will rise to life.
Even today, whenever they read the Law of Moses, the veil still covers their minds.
At once Jesus knew that power had gone out of him, so he turned around in the crowd and asked, Who touched my clothes?
God did this according to his eternal purpose, which he achieved through Christ Jesus our Lord.
So Jesus answered them, I tell you the truth: the Son can do nothing on his own; he does only what he sees his Father doing. What the Father does, the Son also does.
I wrote you with a greatly troubled and distressed heart and with many tears; my purpose was not to make you sad, but to make you realize how much I love you all.
But Jesus kept looking around to see who had done it. 
May the Lord grant him his mercy on that Day! And you know very well how much he did for me in Ephesus.
I tell you, then, do not let anyone deceive you with false arguments, no matter how good they seem to be.
Now, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants? Jesus asked.
It was faith that made the walls of Jericho fall down after the Israelites had marched around them for seven days.
So they looked up and saw no one there but Jesus.
For I hear of your love for all of God's people and the faith you have in the Lord Jesus.
Be sorrowful, cry, and weep; change your laughter into crying, your joy into gloom!
And when you serve Christ in this way, you please God and are approved by others.
and how very great is his power at work in us who believe. This power working in us is the same as the mighty strength
Come and see, he answered. (It was then about four o'clock in the afternoon.) So they went with him and saw where he lived, and spent the rest of that day with him.
Then he got into the boat with them, and the wind died down. The disciples were completely amazed,
Jesus called his twelve disciples together and gave them authority to drive out evil spirits and to heal every disease and every sickness.
If you obey my commands, you will remain in my love, just as I have obeyed my Father's commands and remain in his love.
and used the money to buy the potter's field, as the Lord had commanded me.
But have reverence for Christ in your hearts, and honor him as Lord. Be ready at all times to answer anyone who asks you to explain the hope you have in you,
this is my blood, which seals God's covenant, my blood poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
So Joseph got up, took the child and his mother, and went back to Israel.
He went a little farther on, threw himself on the ground, and prayed that, if possible, he might not have to go through that time of suffering.
The Law was carved in letters on stone tablets, and God's glory appeared when it was given. Even though the brightness on Moses' face was fading, it was so strong that the people of Israel could not keep their eyes fixed on him. If the Law, which brings death when it is in force, came with such glory,
All of you may proclaim God's message, one by one, so that everyone will learn and be encouraged.
We, however, are citizens of heaven, and we eagerly wait for our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, to come from heaven.
Don't be alarmed, he said. I know you are looking for Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified. He is not here -- he has been raised! Look, here is the place where he was placed.
Jesus wept.
I tell you, then, that any man who divorces his wife for any cause other than her unfaithfulness, commits adultery if he marries some other woman.
After they had given their testimony and proclaimed the Lord's message, Peter and John went back to Jerusalem. On their way they preached the Good News in many villages of Samaria.
Then Jesus told them this parable: There was once a rich man who had land which bore good crops.
to tell his people that they will be saved by having their sins forgiven.
I will make those who are victorious pillars in the temple of my God, and they will never leave it. I will write on them the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which will come down out of heaven from my God. I will also write on them my new name.
I will also kill her followers, and then all the churches will know that I am the one who knows everyone's thoughts and wishes. I will repay each of you according to what you have done.
He sent messengers ahead of him, who went into a village in Samaria to get everything ready for him.
Philip found Nathanael and told him, We have found the one whom Moses wrote about in the book of the Law and whom the prophets also wrote about. He is Jesus son of Joseph, from Nazareth.
Moses is the one who said to the people of Israel, God will send you a prophet, just as he sent me, and he will be one of your own people.
Simeon blessed them and said to Mary, his mother, This child is chosen by God for the destruction and the salvation of many in Israel. He will be a sign from God which many people will speak against
Now I know what I will do! Then when my job is gone, I shall have friends who will welcome me in their homes.
The Kingdom of heaven is like this. A man happens to find a treasure hidden in a field. He covers it up again, and is so happy that he goes and sells everything he has, and then goes back and buys that field.
His opponents stood up, but they did not accuse him of any of the evil crimes that I thought they would.
When the other ten disciples heard about this, they became angry with the two brothers.
But when the Holy Spirit comes upon you, you will be filled with power, and you will be witnesses for me in Jerusalem, in all of Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.
and they took the colt to Jesus. Then they threw their cloaks over the animal and helped Jesus get on.
If a boy is circumcised on the Sabbath so that Moses' Law is not broken, why are you angry with me because I made a man completely well on the Sabbath?
Jesus was still speaking when Judas, one of the twelve disciples, arrived. With him was a crowd armed with swords and clubs and sent by the chief priests, the teachers of the Law, and the elders.
and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed Jesus. 
When Jesus had gone indoors, the two blind men came to him, and he asked them, Do you believe that I can heal you? Yes, sir! they answered.
Agrippa said to Festus, I would like to hear this man myself. You will hear him tomorrow, Festus answered.
Come near to God, and he will come near to you. Wash your hands, you sinners! Purify your hearts, you hypocrites!
for the immoral, for sexual perverts, for kidnappers, for those who lie and give false testimony or who do anything else contrary to sound doctrine.
Who are you? they asked him. Jesus answered, What I have told you from the very beginning.
Why do you not understand what I say? It is because you cannot bear to listen to my message.
Judas was a member of our group, for he had been chosen to have a part in our work.
I am the bread of life.
Why, then, do you look at the speck in your brother's eye and pay no attention to the log in your own eye?
After a long debate Peter stood up and said, My friends, you know that a long time ago God chose me from among you to preach the Good News to the Gentiles, so that they could hear and believe.
How is it that you can now see? they asked him.
When Jesus heard this, he said to him, There is still one more thing you need to do. Sell all you have and give the money to the poor, and you will have riches in heaven; then come and follow me.
Slaves, obey your human masters with fear and trembling; and do it with a sincere heart, as though you were serving Christ.
Don't you know that God's people will judge the world? Well, then, if you are to judge the world, aren't you capable of judging small matters?
He saved us and called us to be his own people, not because of what we have done, but because of his own purpose and grace. He gave us this grace by means of Christ Jesus before the beginning of time,
Perhaps my life's blood is to be poured out like an offering on the sacrifice that your faith offers to God. If that is so, I am glad and share my joy with you all.
What then? The people of Israel did not find what they were looking for. It was only the small group that God chose who found it; the rest grew deaf to God's call.
Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives, across from the Temple, when Peter, James, John, and Andrew came to him in private.
and begged him earnestly, My little daughter is very sick. Please come and place your hands on her, so that she will get well and live! 
This is what he says in all his letters when he writes on the subject. There are some difficult things in his letters which ignorant and unstable people explain falsely, as they do with other passages of the Scriptures. So they bring on their own destruction.
False prophets appeared in the past among the people, and in the same way false teachers will appear among you. They will bring in destructive, untrue doctrines, and will deny the Master who redeemed them, and so they will bring upon themselves sudden destruction.
Perhaps you think that all along we have been trying to defend ourselves before you. No! We speak as Christ would have us speak in the presence of God, and everything we do, dear friends, is done to help you.
I am worried about you! Can it be that all my work for you has been for nothing?
Pray to God that you will not have to run away during the winter or on a Sabbath!
At that time two men will be working in a field: one will be taken away, the other will be left behind.
The police officers reported these words to the Roman officials; and when they heard that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens, they were afraid.
as it is written in the law of the Lord: Every first-born male is to be dedicated to the Lord.
and he said to them, The sorrow in my heart is so great that it almost crushes me. Stay here and keep watch with me.
I was made a servant of the gospel by God's special gift, which he gave me through the working of his power.
The Pharisees went off and made a plan to trap Jesus with questions.
You, too, are built upon the foundation laid by the apostles and prophets, the cornerstone being Christ Jesus himself.
He went and stood at her bedside and ordered the fever to leave her. The fever left her, and she got up at once and began to wait on them.
This calls for wisdom and understanding. The seven heads are seven hills, on which the woman sits. They are also seven kings:
And so he left his country and went to live in Haran. After Abraham's father died, God made him move to this land where you now live.
Some teachers of the Law who were sitting there thought to themselves,
Then Peter said, I swear that I am telling the truth! May God punish me if I am not! I do not know that man! Just then a rooster crowed,
Then Philip began to speak; starting from this passage of scripture, he told him the Good News about Jesus.
Peter reached over and helped her get up. Then he called all the believers, including the widows, and presented her alive to them.
For Christ must rule until God defeats all enemies and puts them under his feet.
Those who think they know something really don't know as they ought to know.
Did not I myself make all these things?
Your sister church in Babylon, also chosen by God, sends you greetings, and so does my son Mark.
Jesus said to them, All of you will run away and leave me, for the scripture says, God will kill the shepherd, and the sheep will all be scattered.
I don't do the good I want to do; instead, I do the evil that I do not want to do.
and at the right time he revealed it in his message. This was entrusted to me, and I proclaim it by order of God our Savior.
You will look for me, but you will not find me, because you cannot go where I will be.
You yourselves give them something to eat, Jesus answered. They asked, Do you want us to go and spend two hundred silver coins on bread in order to feed them?
Now, his own people hated him, and so they sent messengers after him to say, We don't want this man to be our king.
When the festival was over, they started back home, but the boy Jesus stayed in Jerusalem. His parents did not know this;
There would not be a body if it were all only one part!
Jesus said to him, Go; your son will live! The man believed Jesus' words and went.
The traitor had given the crowd a signal: The man I kiss is the one you want. Arrest him and take him away under guard.
Happy are you when people hate you, reject you, insult you, and say that you are evil, all because of the Son of Man!
Jesus continued, Does anyone ever bring in a lamp and put it under a bowl or under the bed? Isn't it put on the lampstand?
The word of God is alive and active, sharper than any double-edged sword. It cuts all the way through, to where soul and spirit meet, to where joints and marrow come together. It judges the desires and thoughts of the heart.
His appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow.
In a large house there are dishes and bowls of all kinds: some are made of silver and gold, others of wood and clay; some are for special occasions, others for ordinary use.
Everyone has heard of your loyalty to the gospel, and for this reason I am happy about you. I want you to be wise about what is good, but innocent in what is evil.
Abraham reckoned that God was able to raise Isaac from death -- and, so to speak, Abraham did receive Isaac back from death.
So Jesus stopped and ordered the blind man to be brought to him. When he came near, Jesus asked him,
Afterward, you know, he wanted to receive his father's blessing; but he was turned back, because he could not find any way to change what he had done, even though in tears he looked for it.
There is no difference between the one who plants and the one who waters; God will reward each one according to the work each has done.
The angel said to her, Don't be afraid, Mary; God has been gracious to you.
And now there is waiting for me the victory prize of being put right with God, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give me on that Day -- and not only to me, but to all those who wait with love for him to appear.
Some of them were convinced and joined Paul and Silas; so did many of the leading women and a large group of Greeks who worshiped God.
The one thing required of such servants is that they be faithful to their master.
[As they stood there asking him questions, he straightened up and said to them, Whichever one of you has committed no sin may throw the first stone at her.]
Jesus said, Those who have taken a bath are completely clean and do not have to wash themselves, except for their feet. All of you are clean -- all except one.
I was a stranger but you would not welcome me in your homes, naked but you would not clothe me; I was sick and in prison but you would not take care of me.
Some teachers of the Law, who were Pharisees, saw that Jesus was eating with these outcasts and tax collectors, so they asked his disciples, Why does he eat with such people?
Herod was afraid of John because he knew that John was a good and holy man, and so he kept him safe. He liked to listen to him, even though he became greatly disturbed every time he heard him.
This man, they said, is trying to persuade people to worship God in a way that is against the law!
I turned around to see who was talking to me, and I saw seven gold lampstands,
and said in a loud voice, You are the most blessed of all women, and blessed is the child you will bear!
And so I will always remind you of these matters, even though you already know them and are firmly grounded in the truth you have received.
From that time on Jesus began to say plainly to his disciples, I must go to Jerusalem and suffer much from the elders, the chief priests, and the teachers of the Law. I will be put to death, but three days later I will be raised to life.
But those who reject me publicly, I will reject before my Father in heaven.
I am, answered Jesus, and you will all see the Son of Man seated at the right side of the Almighty and coming with the clouds of heaven!
So many people came together that there was no room left, not even out in front of the door. Jesus was preaching the message to them
When I arrived in Troas to preach the Good News about Christ, I found that the Lord had opened the way for the work there.
For through the living and eternal word of God you have been born again as the children of a parent who is immortal, not mortal.
So the other disciples told him, We have seen the Lord! Thomas said to them, Unless I see the scars of the nails in his hands and put my finger on those scars and my hand in his side, I will not believe.
As he taught them, he said, Watch out for the teachers of the Law, who like to walk around in their long robes and be greeted with respect in the marketplace, 
At once she fell down at his feet and died. The young men came in and saw that she was dead, so they carried her out and buried her beside her husband.
For all things were created by him, and all things exist through him and for him. To God be the glory forever! Amen.
Some of the believers who were scattered by the persecution which took place when Stephen was killed went as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, telling the message to Jews only.
It would have been much better for them never to have known the way of righteousness than to know it and then turn away from the sacred command that was given them.
The next day, as they were on their way and coming near Joppa, Peter went up on the roof of the house about noon in order to pray.
People will come from the east and the west, from the north and the south, and sit down at the feast in the Kingdom of God.
But Peter said to him, I have no money at all, but I give you what I have: in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth I order you to get up and walk!
Some of them go into people's houses and gain control over weak women who are burdened by the guilt of their sins and driven by all kinds of desires,
I did not see any other apostle except James, the Lord's brother.
How? Did I take advantage of you through any of the messengers I sent?
For the Son of Man is about to come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will reward each one according to his deeds.
You don't even know what your life tomorrow will be! You are like a puff of smoke, which appears for a moment and then disappears.
Jesus took the bread, gave thanks to God, and distributed it to the people who were sitting there. He did the same with the fish, and they all had as much as they wanted.
And another scripture says, This is the stone that will make people stumble, the rock that will make them fall. They stumbled because they did not believe in the word; such was God's will for them.
Until now you have not asked for anything in my name; ask and you will receive, so that your happiness may be complete.
All the believers in Lystra and Iconium spoke well of Timothy.
Ah! What do you want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Are you here to destroy us? I know who you are: you are God's holy messenger!
A Jewish leader asked Jesus, Good Teacher, what must I do to receive eternal life?
God's plan is to make known his secret to his people, this rich and glorious secret which he has for all peoples. And the secret is that Christ is in you, which means that you will share in the glory of God.
His disciples asked Jesus what this parable meant,
Jesus said to them, Prophets are respected everywhere except in their own hometown and by their relatives and their family. 
They were especially sad because he had said that they would never see him again. And so they went with him to the ship.
We know that no children of God keep on sinning, for the Son of God keeps them safe, and the Evil One cannot harm them.
For we cannot stop speaking of what we ourselves have seen and heard.
How does he dare talk like this? This is blasphemy! God is the only one who can forgive sins!
Practice these things and devote yourself to them, in order that your progress may be seen by all.
I can assure you that they gave as much as they could, and even more than they could. Of their own free will
The king was sad, but because of the promise he had made in front of all his guests he gave orders that her wish be granted.
The men close to Paul said to him, You are insulting God's High Priest!
Jesus had pity on them and touched their eyes; at once they were able to see, and they followed him.
The next day he saw two Israelites fighting, and he tried to make peace between them. Listen, men, he said, you are fellow Israelites; why are you fighting like this?
For we are partners working together for God, and you are God's field. You are also God's building.
His voice shook the earth at that time, but now he has promised, I will once more shake not only the earth but heaven as well.
Melchizedek was not descended from Levi, but he collected one tenth from Abraham and blessed him, the man who received God's promises.
But if your work is burnt up, then you will lose it; but you yourself will be saved, as if you had escaped through the fire.
Since Christ suffered physically, you too must strengthen yourselves with the same way of thinking that he had; because whoever suffers physically is no longer involved with sin.
This hope does not disappoint us, for God has poured out his love into our hearts by means of the Holy Spirit, who is God's gift to us.
John's disciples came, carried away his body, and buried it; then they went and told Jesus.
But get up and stand on your feet. I have appeared to you to appoint you as my servant. You are to tell others what you have seen of me today and what I will show you in the future.
Mary stood crying outside the tomb. While she was still crying, she bent over and looked in the tomb
Love is eternal. There are inspired messages, but they are temporary; there are gifts of speaking in strange tongues, but they will cease; there is knowledge, but it will pass.
There were two men who owed money to a moneylender, Jesus began. One owed him five hundred silver coins, and the other owed him fifty.
So God turned away from them and gave them over to worship the stars of heaven, as it is written in the book of the prophets: People of Israel! It was not to me that you slaughtered and sacrificed animals for forty years in the desert.
Later on, our ancestors who received the tent from their fathers carried it with them when they went with Joshua and took over the land from the nations that God drove out as they advanced. And it stayed there until the time of David.
But when the Jews opposed this, I was forced to appeal to the Emperor, even though I had no accusation to make against my own people.
And now that I have told you, your hearts are full of sadness.
Didn't he really mean us when he said that? Of course that was written for us. Anyone who plows and anyone who reaps should do their work in the hope of getting a share of the crop.
So then, anyone who hears these words of mine and obeys them is like a wise man who built his house on rock.
I am Gabriel, the angel answered. I stand in the presence of God, who sent me to speak to you and tell you this good news.
Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth. The first heaven and the first earth disappeared, and the sea vanished.
It is not right for you to be proud! You know the saying, A little bit of yeast makes the whole batch of dough rise.
In the presence of God and of Christ Jesus, who will judge the living and the dead, and because he is coming to rule as King, I solemnly urge you
Do you believe that there is only one God? Good! The demons also believe -- and tremble with fear.
So the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath.
We write to you about the Word of life, which has existed from the very beginning. We have heard it, and we have seen it with our eyes; yes, we have seen it, and our hands have touched it.
but for your sake it is much more important that I remain alive.
Again I ask: Did the people of Israel not understand? Moses himself is the first one to answer: I will use a so-called nation to make my people jealous; and by means of a nation of fools I will make my people angry.
They will fight against the Lamb; but the Lamb, together with his called, chosen, and faithful followers, will defeat them, because he is Lord of lords and King of kings.
If you give these instructions to the believers, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, as you feed yourself spiritually on the words of faith and of the true teaching which you have followed.
But soon a very strong wind -- the one called Northeaster -- blew down from the island.
Then the sailors tried to escape from the ship; they lowered the boat into the water and pretended that they were going to put out some anchors from the front of the ship.
Some men came carrying a paralyzed man on a bed, and they tried to carry him into the house and put him in front of Jesus.
For this son of mine was dead, but now he is alive; he was lost, but now he has been found. And so the feasting began.
If anyone hits you on one cheek, let him hit the other one too; if someone takes your coat, let him have your shirt as well. 
and said, You are to say that his disciples came during the night and stole his body while you were asleep.
What do you think a man does who has one hundred sheep and one of them gets lost? He will leave the other ninety-nine grazing on the hillside and go and look for the lost sheep.
No one takes my life away from me. I give it up of my own free will. I have the right to give it up, and I have the right to take it back. This is what my Father has commanded me to do.
When you go without food, wash your face and comb your hair,
When I saw him, I fell down at his feet like a dead man. He placed his right hand on me and said, Don't be afraid! I am the first and the last.
So keep watch over yourselves and over all the flock which the Holy Spirit has placed in your care. Be shepherds of the church of God, which he made his own through the blood of his Son.
But the Day of the Lord will come like a thief. On that Day the heavens will disappear with a shrill noise, the heavenly bodies will burn up and be destroyed, and the earth with everything in it will vanish.
But Jesus said, Leave her alone! Let her keep what she has for the day of my burial.
I gave them the same glory you gave me, so that they may be one, just as you and I are one:
for it is the light that brings a rich harvest of every kind of goodness, righteousness, and truth.
Aware of his situation, he went to the home of Mary, the mother of John Mark, where many people had gathered and were praying.
The dead man sat up and began to talk, and Jesus gave him back to his mother.
But Jesus gave them strict orders not to tell anyone, and he said, Give her something to eat.
A wife is not the master of her own body, but her husband is; in the same way a husband is not the master of his own body, but his wife is.
If your whole body is full of light, with no part of it in darkness, it will be bright all over, as when a lamp shines on you with its brightness.
Then Pilate's soldiers took Jesus into the governor's palace, and the whole company gathered around him.
But the others said, Wait, let us see if Elijah is coming to save him!
All have turned away from God; they have all gone wrong; no one does what is right, not even one.
The Lamb went and took the scroll from the right hand of the one who sits on the throne.
This, however, was bound to happen so that what is written in their Law may come true: They hated me for no reason at all.
When people say, Everything is quiet and safe, then suddenly destruction will hit them! It will come as suddenly as the pains that come upon a woman in labor, and people will not escape.
How was our ancestor Abraham put right with God? It was through his actions, when he offered his son Isaac on the altar.
For the scripture says to the king of Egypt, I made you king in order to use you to show my power and to spread my fame over the whole world.
And the beast that was once alive, but lives no longer, is itself an eighth king who is one of the seven and is going off to be destroyed.
I am not laying down any rules. But by showing how eager others are to help, I am trying to find out how real your own love is.
He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High God. The Lord God will make him a king, as his ancestor David was,
Jesus answered him, Those who love me will obey my teaching. My Father will love them, and my Father and I will come to them and live with them.
Some Pharisees came to him and tried to trap him. Tell us, they asked, does our Law allow a man to divorce his wife?
When Pilate saw that it was no use to go on, but that a riot might break out, he took some water, washed his hands in front of the crowd, and said, I am not responsible for the death of this man! This is your doing!
And so, King Agrippa, I did not disobey the vision I had from heaven.
The foolish ones took their lamps but did not take any extra oil with them, 
A man should fulfill his duty as a husband, and a woman should fulfill her duty as a wife, and each should satisfy the other's needs.
Well, they answered, are you also from Galilee? Study the Scriptures and you will learn that no prophet ever comes from Galilee.
Jesus ordered the spirit, Be quiet and come out of the man! The demon threw the man down in front of them and went out of him without doing him any harm.
I beg you, then, to follow my example.
Heaven is my throne, says the Lord, and the earth is my footstool. What kind of house would you build for me? Where is the place for me to live in?
(They said this because they had seen Trophimus from Ephesus with Paul in the city, and they thought that Paul had taken him into the Temple.)
But what does the scripture say? It says, Send the slave woman and her son away; for the son of the slave woman will not have a part of the father's property along with the son of the free woman.
so they tried to arrest him. But they were afraid of the crowds, who considered Jesus to be a prophet. 
At that time Jesus arrived from Galilee and came to John at the Jordan to be baptized by him. 
I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of heaven; what you prohibit on earth will be prohibited in heaven, and what you permit on earth will be permitted in heaven.
He let them go, and the evil spirits went out of the man and entered the pigs. The whole herd -- about two thousand pigs in all -- rushed down the side of the cliff into the lake and was drowned.
This perfume could have been sold for a large amount and the money given to the poor!
and Jesus spoke up and asked the teachers of the Law and the Pharisees, Does our Law allow healing on the Sabbath or not?
For I am certain that nothing can separate us from his love: neither death nor life, neither angels nor other heavenly rulers or powers, neither the present nor the future,
One of Jesus' disciples, Judas Iscariot -- the one who was going to betray him -- said, 
When the Pharisees heard this, they replied, He drives out demons only because their ruler Beelzebul gives him power to do so.
The time came for Elizabeth to have her baby, and she gave birth to a son. 
After questioning me, the Romans wanted to release me, because they found that I had done nothing for which I deserved to die.
When the chief priests and the officer in charge of the Temple guards heard this, they wondered what had happened to the apostles.
Paul placed his hands on them, and the Holy Spirit came upon them; they spoke in strange tongues and also proclaimed God's message.
You need to be patient, in order to do the will of God and receive what he promises.
When I came to you, my friends, to preach God's secret truth, I did not use big words and great learning.
I have come into the world as light, so that everyone who believes in me should not remain in the darkness.
After three months we sailed away on a ship from Alexandria, called The Twin Gods, which had spent the winter in the island.
After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding back the four winds so that no wind should blow on the earth or the sea or against any tree.
What happened to them shows that the proverbs are true: A dog goes back to what it has vomited and A pig that has been washed goes back to roll in the mud.
The next day John saw Jesus coming to him, and said, There is the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!
This love I speak of means that we must live in obedience to God's commands. The command, as you have all heard from the beginning, is that you must all live in love.
and placed it in his own tomb, which he had just recently dug out of solid  rock. Then he rolled a large stone across the entrance to the tomb and went away.
In the same way you wives must submit yourselves to your husbands, so that if any of them do not believe God's word, your conduct will win them over to believe. It will not be necessary for you to say a word,
Jesus said, Watch out; don't be fooled. Many men, claiming to speak for me, will come and say, I am he! and, The time has come! But don't follow them.
As they were untying the colt, its owners said to them, Why are you untying it?
After sending the people away, he went up a hill by himself to pray. When evening came, Jesus was there alone;
Then the Devil took Jesus to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in all their greatness.
Jesus said this and then added, Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I will go and wake him up.
Among them was a woman who had suffered from severe bleeding for twelve years; she had spent all she had on doctors, but no one had been able to cure her.
(None of us ever hate our own bodies. Instead, we feed them, and take care of them, just as Christ does the church;
Let me tell you, my friends, that the gospel I preach is not of human origin.
That is why we always pray for you. We ask our God to make you worthy of the life he has called you to live. May he fulfill by his power all your desire for goodness and complete your work of faith.
Come! answered Jesus. So Peter got out of the boat and started walking on the water to Jesus.
For Christ's sake we are fools; but you are wise in union with Christ! We are weak, but you are strong! We are despised, but you are honored!
So stand ready, with truth as a belt tight around your waist, with righteousness as your breastplate,
As the scripture says, He gives generously to the needy; his kindness lasts forever.
(-b) All of God's people send you their greetings.
We did not accept anyone's support without paying for it. Instead, we worked and toiled; we kept working day and night so as not to be an expense to any of you.
and said, You son of the Devil! You are the enemy of everything that is good. You are full of all kinds of evil tricks, and you always keep trying to turn the Lord's truths into lies!
I tell you this, Jesus added, prophets are never welcomed in their hometown.
Jesus spoke up, There were ten who were healed; where are the other nine?
May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Then a man named Jairus arrived; he was an official in the local synagogue. He threw himself down at Jesus' feet and begged him to go to his home,
Jesus was walking through some wheat fields on a Sabbath. His disciples began to pick the heads of wheat, rub them in their hands, and eat the grain.
Jesus said, I came to this world to judge, so that the blind should see and those who see should become blind.
It was faith that made him establish the Passover and order the blood to be sprinkled on the doors, so that the Angel of Death would not kill the first-born sons of the Israelites.
None of the others at the table understood why Jesus said this to him.
He is not here; he has been raised. Remember what he said to you while he was in Galilee:
No one lights a lamp and then hides it or puts it under a bowl; instead, it is put on the lampstand, so that people may see the light as they come in.
He said, This is the blood which seals the covenant that God has commanded you to obey.
And after I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back and take you to myself, so that you will be where I am.
And I saw the Holy City, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared and ready, like a bride dressed to meet her husband.
His fellow servant fell down and begged him, Be patient with me, and I will pay you back!
And he said, It is done! I am the first and the last, the beginning and the end. To anyone who is thirsty I will give the right to drink from the spring of the water of life without paying for it.
She recognized Peter's voice and was so happy that she ran back in without opening the door, and announced that Peter was standing outside.
Why do you not judge for yourselves the right thing to do?
I remember your tears, and I want to see you very much, so that I may be filled with joy.
If you had really believed Moses, you would have believed me, because he wrote about me.
Paul, Apollos, and Peter; this world, life and death, the present and the future -- all these are yours,
But Jesus refused to answer a single word, with the result that the Governor was greatly surprised.
Then he took the children in his arms, placed his hands on each of them, and blessed them.
Because of the crowd, however, they could find no way to take him in. So they carried him up on the roof, made an opening in the tiles, and let him down on his bed into the middle of the group in front of Jesus.
The woman said to him, I know that the Messiah will come, and when he comes, he will tell us everything.
Another one said, I have bought five pairs of oxen and am on my way to try them out; please accept my apologies.
Before Jesus began his work, John preached to all the people of Israel that they should turn from their sins and be baptized.
because the word of God and the prayer make it acceptable to God.
If we obey God's commands, then we are sure that we know him.
The Lord's hand will come down on you now; you will be blind and will not see the light of day for a time. At once Elymas felt a dark mist cover his eyes, and he walked around trying to find someone to lead him by the hand.
While they all watched, the man got up, picked up his mat, and hurried away. They were all completely amazed and praised God, saying, We have never seen anything like this!
Jesus turned around and said to Peter, Get away from me, Satan! You are an obstacle in my way, because these thoughts of yours don't come from God, but from human nature.
And God, our source of peace, will soon crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you.
We found this man to be a dangerous nuisance; he starts riots among Jews all over the world and is a leader of the party of the Nazarenes.
And so I tell you that I will send you prophets and wise men and teachers; you will kill some of them, crucify others, and whip others in the synagogues and chase them from town to town.
Then he sent them to Bethlehem with these instructions: Go and make a careful search for the child; and when you find him, let me know, so that I too may go and worship him.
Only Luke is with me. Get Mark and bring him with you, because he can help me in the work.
I am the Lord's servant, said Mary; may it happen to me as you have said. And the angel left her.
and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias come in and place his hands on him so that he might see again.
It was for this purpose that I went to Damascus with authority and orders from the chief priests.
But if I delay, this letter will let you know how we should conduct ourselves in God's household, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and support of the truth.
The master of the house will get up and close the door; then when you stand outside and begin to knock on the door and say, Open the door for us, sir! he will answer you, I don't know where you come from!
At that moment Zechariah was able to speak again, and he started praising God.
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has never put it out.
You say, Do not commit adultery -- but do you commit adultery? You detest idols -- but do you rob temples?
Nor does the Father himself judge anyone. He has given his Son the full right to judge,
Paul looked straight at the Council and said, My fellow Israelites! My conscience is perfectly clear about the way in which I have lived before God to this very day.
When you come to a town or village, go in and look for someone who is willing to welcome you, and stay with him until you leave that place.
But you teach that if people have something they could use to help their father or mother, but say, This belongs to God,
There we found a ship that was going to Phoenicia, so we went aboard and sailed away.
How blind you are! Which is the more important, the gift or the altar which makes the gift holy?
That was not what you learned about Christ!
And so I am filled with gladness, and my words are full of joy. And I, mortal though I am, will rest assured in hope,
The one who plants and the one who waters really do not matter. It is God who matters, because he makes the plant grow.
(For the Sadducees say that people will not rise from death and that there are no angels or spirits; but the Pharisees believe in all three.)
I have the same hope in God that these themselves have, namely, that all people, both the good and the bad, will rise from death.
If Joshua had given the people the rest that God had promised, God would not have spoken later about another day.
Jesus answered him, You do not understand now what I am doing, but you will understand later.
You hypocrites! How right Isaiah was when he prophesied about you!
But give what is in your cups and plates to the poor, and everything will be ritually clean for you.
We must not complain, as some of them did -- and they were destroyed by the Angel of Death.
But from now on the Son of Man will be seated at the right side of Almighty God.
Be obedient to God, and do not allow your lives to be shaped by those desires you had when you were still ignorant.
Jesus noticed how some of the guests were choosing the best places, so he told this parable to all of them:
As he saw the crowds, his heart was filled with pity for them, because they were worried and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet, and covered with gold ornaments, precious stones, and pearls. In her hand she held a gold cup full of obscene and filthy things, the result of her immorality.
Instead, when you are invited, go and sit in the lowest place, so that your host will come to you and say, Come on up, my friend, to a better place. This will bring you honor in the presence of all the other guests.
I am the good shepherd, who is willing to die for the sheep.
Because you have kept my command to endure, I will also keep you safe from the time of trouble which is coming upon the world to test all the people on earth.
Pilate said to them, Then you yourselves take him and try him according to your own law. They replied, We are not allowed to put anyone to death.
You must put to death, then, the earthly desires at work in you, such as sexual immorality, indecency, lust, evil passions, and greed (for greed is a form of idolatry).
May you always be joyful in your union with the Lord. I say it again: rejoice!
But Peter denied it, Woman, I don't even know him!
Each of you should remain as you were when you accepted God's call.
Jesus heard them and answered, People who are well do not need a doctor, but only those who are sick. I have not come to call respectable people, but outcasts.
and Abraham gave him one tenth of all he had taken. (The first meaning of Melchizedek's name is King of Righteousness; and because he was king of Salem, his name also means King of Peace.)
I persecuted to the death the people who followed this Way. I arrested men and women and threw them into prison.
But I still feel confident about you. Our life in union with the Lord makes me confident that you will not take a different view and that whoever is upsetting you will be punished by God.
You fool! When you plant a seed in the ground, it does not sprout to life unless it dies.
Jesus answered, But the scripture also says, Do not put the Lord your God to the test.
Men, I see that our voyage from here on will be dangerous; there will be great damage to the cargo and to the ship, and loss of life as well.
God has not placed the angels as rulers over the new world to come -- the world of which we speak.
When we arrived in Jerusalem, the believers welcomed us warmly.
But if it grows thorns and weeds, it is worth nothing; it is in danger of being cursed by God and will be destroyed by fire.
But first he must suffer much and be rejected by the people of this day.
Jesus said to him, Salvation has come to this house today, for this man, also, is a descendant of Abraham.
If a family divides itself into groups which fight each other, that family will fall apart.
and God declared him to be high priest, in the priestly order of Melchizedek.
Don't be afraid of your enemies; always be courageous, and this will prove to them that they will lose and that you will win, because it is God who gives you the victory.
God puts people right through their faith in Jesus Christ. God does this to all who believe in Christ, because there is no difference at all:
The notice of the accusation against him said: The King of the Jews.
Give to everyone who asks you for something, and when someone takes what is yours, do not ask for it back.
I do not ask you to take them out of the world, but I do ask you to keep them safe from the Evil One.
It may be that some there will not obey the message we send you in this letter. If so, take note of them and have nothing to do with them, so that they will be ashamed.
We who believe, then, do receive that rest which God promised. It is just as he said, I was angry and made a solemn promise: They will never enter the land where I would have given them rest! He said this even though his work had been finished from the time he created the world.
because you will not abandon me in the world of the dead; you will not allow your faithful servant to rot in the grave.
Do not be afraid, Jesus said to them. Go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee, and there they will see me. Matthew . 
A healthy tree bears good fruit, but a poor tree bears bad fruit.
And now I commend you to the care of God and to the message of his grace, which is able to build you up and give you the blessings God has for all his people.
The city's wall was built on twelve foundation stones, on which were written the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
Very early the next morning, long before daylight, Jesus got up and left the house. He went out of town to a lonely place, where he prayed.
But those who proclaim God's message speak to people and give them help, encouragement, and comfort.
I am the vine, and you are the branches. Those who remain in me, and I in them, will bear much fruit; for you can do nothing without me.
At this the woman came and fell at his feet. Help me, sir! she said.
That beast was once alive, but lives no longer; it is about to come up from the abyss and will go off to be destroyed. The people living on earth whose names have not been written before the creation of the world in the book of the living, will all be amazed as they look at the beast. It was once alive; now it no longer lives, but it will reappear.
Don't I have the right to do as I wish with my own money? Or are you jealous because I am generous?
But they did not understand his answer.
[Then he bent over again and wrote on the ground.]
The sun rises with its blazing heat and burns the plant; its flower falls off, and its beauty is destroyed. In the same way the rich will be destroyed while they go about their business.
while others grabbed the servants, beat them, and killed them.
We found some believers there who asked us to stay with them a week. And so we came to Rome.
They spat on him, and took the stick and hit him over the head.
Do not work for food that spoils; instead, work for the food that lasts for eternal life. This is the food which the Son of Man will give you, because God, the Father, has put his mark of approval on him.
For it is clear that it is not the angels that he helps. Instead, he helps the descendants of Abraham.
They entered the city and went up to the room where they were staying: Peter, John, James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus, Simon the Patriot, and Judas son of James.
And so I will come to you full of joy, if it is God's will, and enjoy a refreshing visit with you.
They started discussing among themselves: He says this because we don't have any bread.
Jesus looked straight at him with love and said, You need only one thing. Go and sell all you have and give the money to the poor, and you will have riches in heaven; then come and follow me. 
(Not even his brothers believed in him.)
When the chief priests and the Temple guards saw him, they shouted, Crucify him! Crucify him! Pilate said to them, You take him, then, and crucify him. I find no reason to condemn him.
The angel also said to me, The waters you saw, on which the prostitute sits, are nations, peoples, races, and languages.
for we are members of his body.)
Sir, the woman said, you don't have a bucket, and the well is deep. Where would you get that life-giving water?
How terrible for you, blind guides! You teach, If someone swears by the Temple, he isn't bound by his vow; but if he swears by the gold in the Temple, he is bound.
How happy are those who have no doubts about me!
Then I saw another angel come out of the temple in heaven, and he also had a sharp sickle.
The Jewish authorities were greatly surprised and said, How does this man know so much when he has never been to school?
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
and said, Don't be afraid, Paul! You must stand before the Emperor. And God in his goodness to you has spared the lives of all those who are sailing with you.
The seeds that fell among thorn bushes stand for those who hear; but the worries and riches and pleasures of this life crowd in and choke them, and their fruit never ripens.
All the people of the town gathered in front of the house. 
remember this: whoever turns a sinner back from the wrong way will save that sinner's soul from death and bring about the forgiveness of many sins.
Then he went off from them about the distance of a stone's throw and knelt down and prayed.
The Lord said to him, Take your sandals off, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.
The next day we arrived at Sidon. Julius was kind to Paul and allowed him to go and see his friends, to be given what he needed.
The sin of the Jews brought rich blessings to the world, and their spiritual poverty brought rich blessings to the Gentiles. Then, how much greater the blessings will be when the complete number of Jews is included!
Let us, then, do our best to receive that rest, so that no one of us will fail as they did because of their lack of faith.
They drove out many demons, and rubbed olive oil on many sick people and healed them.
do not despise inspired messages.
A soft wind from the south began to blow, and the men thought that they could carry out their plan, so they pulled up the anchor and sailed as close as possible along the coast of Crete.
They should be tested first, and then, if they pass the test, they are to serve.
Suddenly an angel of the Lord stood there, and a light shone in the cell. The angel shook Peter by the shoulder, woke him up, and said, Hurry! Get up! At once the chains fell off Peter's hands.
This same matter is spoken of again: They will never enter that land where I would have given them rest.
And so they left, and on their way they saw the same star they had seen in the East. When they saw it, how happy they were, what joy was theirs! It went ahead of them until it stopped over the place where the child was.
I have used figures of speech to tell you these things. But the time will come when I will not use figures of speech, but will speak to you plainly about the Father.
One of the disciples, the one whom Jesus loved, was sitting next to Jesus.
Then the two prophets heard a loud voice say to them from heaven, Come up here! As their enemies watched, they went up into heaven in a cloud.
You yourselves know very well that you should do just what we did. We were not lazy when we were with you.
The soldiers carried out their orders. They got Paul and took him that night as far as Antipatris.
no one buys their gold, silver, precious stones, and pearls; their goods of linen, purple cloth, silk, and scarlet cloth; all kinds of rare woods and all kinds of objects made of ivory and of expensive wood, of bronze, iron, and marble;
After the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his clothes and divided them into four parts, one part for each soldier. They also took the robe, which was made of one piece of woven cloth without any seams in it.
A third of the human race was killed by those three plagues: the fire, the smoke, and the sulfur coming out of the horses' mouths.
Those who are children of God do not continue to sin, for God's very nature is in them; and because God is their Father, they cannot continue to sin.
Paul and Barnabas spent some time in Antioch, and together with many others they taught and preached the word of the Lord.
And there is another reason why we always give thanks to God. When we brought you God's message, you heard it and accepted it, not as a message from human beings but as God's message, which indeed it is. For God is at work in you who believe.
My friends, each of you should remain in fellowship with God in the same condition that you were when you were called.
No one stood by me the first time I defended myself; all deserted me. May God not count it against them!
Or could it be that the word of God came from you? Or are you the only ones to whom it came?
I was circumcised when I was a week old. I am an Israelite by birth, of the tribe of Benjamin, a pure-blooded Hebrew. As far as keeping the Jewish Law is concerned, I was a Pharisee,
Jesus knew what they were saying, so he asked them, Why are you discussing among yourselves about not having any bread? What little faith you have!
Nor is it fitting for you to use language which is obscene, profane, or vulgar. Rather you should give thanks to God.
Mary arrived where Jesus was, and as soon as she saw him, she fell at his feet. Lord, she said, if you had been here, my brother would not have died!
The message you heard from the very beginning is this: we must love one another.
Some of the people in the crowd heard him say this and said, This man is really the Prophet!
If, then, the whole church meets together and everyone starts speaking in strange tongues -- and if some ordinary people or unbelievers come in, won't they say that you are all crazy?
But when God was about to send his first-born Son into the world, he said, All of God's angels must worship him.
and avoid every kind of evil.
But Pilate asked the crowd, Which one of these two do you want me to set free for you? Barabbas! they answered.
It was Jesus, a descendant of David, whom God made the Savior of the people of Israel, as he had promised.
I know that you always listen to me, but I say this for the sake of the people here, so that they will believe that you sent me.
That teaching is found in the gospel that was entrusted to me to announce, the Good News from the glorious and blessed God.
While Pilate was sitting in the judgment hall, his wife sent him a message: Have nothing to do with that innocent man, because in a dream last night I suffered much on account of him.
But you dishonor the poor! Who are the ones who oppress you and drag you before the judges? The rich!
After the Sabbath, as Sunday morning was dawning, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb.
and screamed in a loud voice, Jesus, Son of the Most High God! What do you want with me? For God's sake, I beg you, don't punish me! 
and if one of you wants to be first, you must be the slave of all.
He is the key that opens all the hidden treasures of God's wisdom and knowledge.
How is it that you don't understand that I was not talking to you about bread? Guard yourselves from the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees!
But these have been written in order that you may believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that through your faith in him you may have life.
The kings of the earth practiced sexual immorality with her, and the people of the world became drunk from drinking the wine of her immorality.
For you gave him authority over all people, so that he might give eternal life to all those you gave him.
If the Lord is willing, however, I will come to you soon, and then I will find out for myself the power which these proud people have, and not just what they say.
And it deceived all the people living on earth by means of the miracles which it was allowed to perform in the presence of the first beast. The beast told them to build an image in honor of the beast that had been wounded by the sword and yet lived.
The man was made king and came back. At once he ordered his servants to appear before him, in order to find out how much they had earned.
He was absolutely sure that God would be able to do what he had promised.
But we will be driven ashore on some island.
Moses was faithful in God's house as a servant, and he spoke of the things that God would say in the future.
There are these two things, then, that cannot change and about which God cannot lie. So we who have found safety with him are greatly encouraged to hold firmly to the hope placed before us.
Just as the weeds are gathered up and burned in the fire, so the same thing will happen at the end of the age:
It is much harder for a rich person to enter the Kingdom of God than for a camel to go through the eye of a needle.
but Jesus called the children to him and said, Let the children come to me and do not stop them, because the Kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
Then he said, Here I am, O God, to do your will. So God does away with all the old sacrifices and puts the sacrifice of Christ in their place.
Instead, all that is left is to wait in fear for the coming Judgment and the fierce fire which will destroy those who oppose God!
I heard what sounded like a voice coming from among the four living creatures, which said, A quart of wheat for a day's wages, and three quarts of barley for a day's wages. But do not damage the olive trees and the vineyards!
Through faith women received their dead relatives raised back to life. Others, refusing to accept freedom, died under torture in order to be raised to a better life.
They answered him with a shout, No, not him! We want Barabbas! (Barabbas was a bandit.)
He saved others, but he cannot save himself! Isn't he the king of Israel? If he will come down off the cross now, we will believe in him!
In this powerful way the word of the Lord kept spreading and growing stronger.
and said, This man said, I am able to tear down God's Temple and three days later build it back up.
Live as free people; do not, however, use your freedom to cover up any evil, but live as God's slaves.
The messengers, who had been sent by the Pharisees,
But those who seemed to be the leaders -- I say this because it makes no difference to me what they were; God does not judge by outward appearances -- those leaders, I say, made no new suggestions to me.
that he appeared to Peter and then to all twelve apostles.
Christ did not send me to baptize. He sent me to tell the Good News, and to tell it without using the language of human wisdom, in order to make sure that Christ's death on the cross is not robbed of its power.
And he went on to say, It is what comes out of you that makes you unclean.
Then Jesus looked up to heaven, gave a deep groan, and said to the man, Ephphatha, which means, Open up!
So they called them back in and told them that under no condition were they to speak or to teach in the name of Jesus.
Instead, in order that none of you be deceived by sin and become stubborn, you must help one another every day, as long as the word Today in the scripture applies to us.
John is the one to whom you sent your messengers, and he spoke on behalf of the truth.
May the Lord show mercy to the family of Onesiphorus, because he cheered me up many times. He was not ashamed that I am in prison,
The Lord said to him, Go, because I have chosen him to serve me, to make my name known to Gentiles and kings and to the people of Israel.
These men who were hired last worked only one hour, they said, while we put up with a whole day's work in the hot sun -- yet you paid them the same as you paid us!
But the day will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast.
If this is how I drive them out, how do your followers drive them out? Your own followers prove that you are wrong!
Then Jesus said to him, Listen! Don't tell anyone, but go straight to the priest and let him examine you; then in order to prove to everyone that you are cured, offer the sacrifice that Moses ordered.
You snakes -- how can you say good things when you are evil? For the mouth speaks what the heart is full of.
There was no one in the group who was in need. Those who owned fields or houses would sell them, bring the money received from the sale,
He had just begun to do so when one of them was brought in who owed him millions of dollars.
God is one, and he will put the Jews right with himself on the basis of their faith, and will put the Gentiles right through their faith.
They have lost all feeling of shame; they give themselves over to vice and do all sorts of indecent things without restraint.
(In saying this he indicated the kind of death he was going to suffer.)
Now, the Lord in this passage is the Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is present, there is freedom.
but could not find his body. They came back saying they had seen a vision of angels who told them that he is alive.
And all who heard were completely amazed. How well he does everything! they exclaimed. He even causes the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak!
What I mean, friends, is that what is made of flesh and blood cannot share in God's Kingdom, and what is mortal cannot possess immortality.
I assure you that many prophets and many of God's people wanted very much to see what you see, but they could not, and to hear what you hear, but they did not.
Do not, because of food, destroy what God has done. All foods may be eaten, but it is wrong to eat anything that will cause someone else to fall into sin.
Salt is good, but if it loses its saltiness, there is no way to make it salty again.
Get up, let us go. Look, here is the man who is betraying me!
When I come to you, I know that I shall come with a full measure of the blessing of Christ.
Our appeal to you is not based on error or impure motives, nor do we try to trick anyone.
Be alert, be on watch! Your enemy, the Devil, roams around like a roaring lion, looking for someone to devour.
With whom was God angry for forty years? With the people who sinned, who fell down dead in the desert.
It is as Isaiah had said before, If the Lord Almighty had not left us some descendants, we would have become like Sodom, we would have been like Gomorrah.
-So then, someone must join us as a witness to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. He must be one of the men who were in our group during the whole time that the Lord Jesus traveled about with us, beginning from the time John preached his message of baptism until the day Jesus was taken up from us to heaven.
So I would prefer that the younger widows get married, have children, and take care of their homes, so as to give our enemies no chance of speaking evil of us.
Jesus said to him, None of you will ever believe unless you see miracles and wonders.
For many days we could not see the sun or the stars, and the wind kept on blowing very hard. We finally gave up all hope of being saved.
After everyone had eaten enough, they lightened the ship by throwing all the wheat into the sea.
So have nothing at all to do with such people.
who has gone to heaven and is at the right side of God, ruling over all angels and heavenly authorities and powers.
when the people gathered around him and asked, How long are you going to keep us in suspense? Tell us the plain truth: are you the Messiah?
But Jesus answered, Let us first feed the children. It isn't right to take the children's food and throw it to the dogs.
Jesus told them still another parable: The Kingdom of heaven is like this. A woman takes some yeast and mixes it with a bushel of flour until the whole batch of dough rises.
I want to tell those of you who have sinned in the past, and all the others; I said it before during my second visit to you, but I will say it again now that I am away: the next time I come nobody will escape punishment.
I repeat, I know that this man was snatched to Paradise (again, I do not know whether this actually happened or whether it was a vision -- only God knows), and there he heard things which cannot be put into words, things that human lips may not speak.
for man was not created from woman, but woman from man.
So Jesus ordered the crowd to sit down on the ground.
And tell Archippus, Be sure to finish the task you were given in the Lord's service.
And Paul concluded: You are to know, then, that God's message of salvation has been sent to the Gentiles. They will listen!
For creation was condemned to lose its purpose, not of its own will, but because God willed it to be so. Yet there was the hope
You must, of course, continue faithful on a firm and sure foundation, and must not allow yourselves to be shaken from the hope you gained when you heard the gospel. It is of this gospel that I, Paul, became a servant -- this gospel which has been preached to everybody in the world.
King Agrippa! I can speak to you with all boldness, because you know about these things. I am sure that you have taken notice of every one of them, for this thing has not happened hidden away in a corner.
Later the others arrived. Sir, sir! Let us in! they cried out.
Here is my servant, whom I have chosen, the one I love, and with whom I am pleased. I will send my Spirit upon him, and he will announce my judgment to the nations.
And so I sent for you at once, and you have been good enough to come. Now we are all here in the presence of God, waiting to hear anything that the Lord has instructed you to say.
But by means of that commandment sin found its chance to stir up all kinds of selfish desires in me. Apart from law, sin is a dead thing.
The peace that Christ gives is to guide you in the decisions you make; for it is to this peace that God has called you together in the one body. And be thankful.
The soil itself makes the plants grow and bear fruit; first the tender stalk appears, then the head, and finally the head full of grain.
This calls for wisdom. Whoever is intelligent can figure out the meaning of the number of the beast, because the number stands for the name of someone. Its number is .
She came up in the crowd behind Jesus and touched the edge of his cloak, and her bleeding stopped at once.
Instead, you are to go to the lost sheep of the people of Israel.
some of the bystanders asked them, What are you doing, untying that colt?
So Peter got ready and went with them. When he arrived, he was taken to the room upstairs, where all the widows crowded around him, crying and showing him all the shirts and coats that Dorcas had made while she was alive.
I know, she replied, that he will rise to life on the last day.
At once the Spirit took control of me. There in heaven was a throne with someone sitting on it.
the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law started grumbling, This man welcomes outcasts and even eats with them!
Who made you superior to others? Didn't God give you everything you have? Well, then, how can you boast, as if what you have were not a gift?
There the worms that eat them never die, and the fire that burns them is never put out.
The argument became so violent that the commander was afraid that Paul would be torn to pieces. So he ordered his soldiers to go down into the group, get Paul away from them, and take him into the fort.
I went because God revealed to me that I should go. In a private meeting with the leaders I explained the gospel message that I preach to the Gentiles. I did not want my work in the past or in the present to be a failure.
As soon as Jesus was baptized, he came up out of the water. Then heaven was opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God coming down like a dove and lighting on him.
But Jesus said to them, You yourselves give them something to eat. They answered, All we have are five loaves and two fish. Do you want us to go and buy food for this whole crowd?
Without being told, Jesus knew that they were grumbling about this, so he said to them, Does this make you want to give up?
Jesus knew what they were thinking, and so he said to them, Any country that divides itself into groups which fight each other will not last very long. And any town or family that divides itself into groups which fight each other will fall apart.
Ananias answered, Lord, many people have told me about this man and about all the terrible things he has done to your people in Jerusalem.
But if I do not know the language being spoken, those who use it will be foreigners to me and I will be a foreigner to them.
When Gallio was made the Roman governor of Achaia, Jews there got together, seized Paul, and took him into court.
A large crowd of people followed him; among them were some women who were weeping and wailing for him.
The ten horns you saw are ten kings who have not yet begun to rule, but who will be given authority to rule as kings for one hour with the beast.
Then another angel, who is in charge of the fire, came from the altar. He shouted in a loud voice to the angel who had the sharp sickle, Use your sickle, and cut the grapes from the vineyard of the earth, because the grapes are ripe!
But I could not find that he had done anything for which he deserved the death sentence. And since he himself made an appeal to the Emperor, I have decided to send him.
Jesus answered them, Go and tell that fox: I am driving out demons and performing cures today and tomorrow, and on the third day I shall finish my work.
Jesus Christ is the one who came with the water of his baptism and the blood of his death. He came not only with the water, but with both the water and the blood. And the Spirit himself testifies that this is true, because the Spirit is truth.
And you have, in fact, behaved like this toward all the believers in all of Macedonia. So we beg you, our friends, to do even more.
But in that case, how could the Scriptures come true which say that this is what must happen?
And the crowd joined in the attack against Paul and Silas. Then the officials tore the clothes off Paul and Silas and ordered them to be whipped.
Be firm in your faith and resist him, because you know that other believers in all the world are going through the same kind of sufferings.
With his tail he dragged a third of the stars out of the sky and threw them down to the earth. He stood in front of the woman, in order to eat her child as soon as it was born.
You go on to the festival. I am not going to this festival, because the right time has not come for me.
Have nothing to do with the worthless things that people do, things that belong to the darkness. Instead, bring them out to the light.
When Pilate heard this, he was even more afraid.
and they will be paid with suffering for the suffering they have caused. Pleasure for them is to do anything in broad daylight that will satisfy their bodily appetites; they are a shame and a disgrace as they join you in your meals, all the while enjoying their deceitful ways!
It was some enemy who did this, he answered. Do you want us to go and pull up the weeds? they asked him.
And I saw the Lamb break open the sixth seal. There was a violent earthquake, and the sun became black like coarse black cloth, and the moon turned completely red like blood.
It is love, then, that you should strive for. Set your hearts on spiritual gifts, especially the gift of proclaiming God's message.
for God will judge you in the same way you judge others, and he will apply to you the same rules you apply to others.
They will disappear, but you will remain; they will all wear out like clothes.
I have already told you that I am he, Jesus said. If, then, you are looking for me, let these others go.
For the Law of Moses could not make anything perfect. And now a better hope has been provided through which we come near to God.
How terrible for you! You make fine tombs for the prophets -- the very prophets your ancestors murdered.
God punishes them, because what can be known about God is plain to them, for God himself made it plain.
And Jesus concluded, Many are invited, but few are chosen.
We must not be like Cain; he belonged to the Evil One and murdered his own brother Abel. Why did Cain murder him? Because the things he himself did were wrong, and the things his brother did were right.
and when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent his sons, our ancestors, on their first visit there.
Jesus grew both in body and in wisdom, gaining favor with God and people.
You know that your bodies are parts of the body of Christ. Shall I take a part of Christ's body and make it part of the body of a prostitute? Impossible!
I did come from the Father, and I came into the world; and now I am leaving the world and going to the Father.
But this son of yours wasted all your property on prostitutes, and when he comes back home, you kill the prize calf for him!
He will change our weak mortal bodies and make them like his own glorious body, using that power by which he is able to bring all things under his rule.
and said to them, You brought this man to me and said that he was misleading the people. Now, I have examined him here in your presence, and I have not found him guilty of any of the crimes you accuse him of.
With great power the apostles gave witness to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and God poured rich blessings on them all.
The chief priests and the teachers of the Law stepped forward and made strong accusations against Jesus.
This means that every time you eat this bread and drink from this cup you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes.
He went into the house of God, and he and his men ate the bread offered to God, even though it was against the Law  for them to eat it -- only the priests were allowed to eat that bread.
In the same way you younger people must submit yourselves to your elders. And all of you must put on the apron of humility, to serve one another; for the scripture says, God resists the proud, but shows favor to the humble.
Treat them with the greatest respect and love because of the work they do. Be at peace among yourselves.
You have been told how I used to live when I was devoted to the Jewish religion, how I persecuted without mercy the church of God and did my best to destroy it.
On our behalf Jesus has gone in there before us and has become a high priest forever, in the priestly order of Melchizedek.
and while they were in Bethlehem, the time came for her to have her baby.
This is good and it pleases God our Savior,
So do not be afraid; you are worth much more than many sparrows!
But a woman will be saved through having children, if she perseveres in faith and love and holiness, with modesty.
For the Kingdom of God is not a matter of words but of power.
Let us be bold, then, and say, The Lord is my helper, I will not be afraid. What can anyone do to me?
You learned of God's grace from Epaphras, our dear fellow servant, who is Christ's faithful worker on our behalf.
I will make this covenant with them when I take away their sins.
but if she does, she must remain single or else be reconciled to her husband; and a husband must not divorce his wife.
The woman saw that she had been found out, so she came trembling and threw herself at Jesus' feet. There in front of everybody, she told him why she had touched him and how she had been healed at once.
He will speak words to you by which you and all your family will be saved.
so that all of you together may praise with one voice the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He went over to him, poured oil and wine on his wounds and bandaged them; then he put the man on his own animal and took him to an inn, where he took care of him.
Happy are you who are hungry now; you will be filled! Happy are you who weep now; you will laugh!
Give to others, and God will give to you. Indeed, you will receive a full measure, a generous helping, poured into your hands -- all that you can hold. The measure you use for others is the one that God will use for you.
We believe that Jesus died and rose again, and so we believe that God will take back with Jesus those who have died believing in him.
At that very moment three men who had been sent to me from Caesarea arrived at the house where I was staying.
They are for you, who through faith are kept safe by God's power for the salvation which is ready to be revealed at the end of time.
And God, who knows the thoughts of everyone, showed his approval of the Gentiles by giving the Holy Spirit to them, just as he had to us.
For you know the instructions we gave you by the authority of the Lord Jesus.
And about an hour later another man insisted strongly, There isn't any doubt that this man was with Jesus, because he also is a Galilean!
But Peter said, Certainly not, Lord! I have never eaten anything ritually unclean or defiled.
Where did John's right to baptize come from: was it from God or from human beings? They started to argue among themselves, What shall we say? If we answer, From God, he will say to us, Why, then, did you not believe John?
I remember the sincere faith you have, the kind of faith that your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice also had. I am sure that you have it also.
When they heard Paul speak about a raising from death, some of them made fun of him, but others said, We want to hear you speak about this again.
Happy are those who are merciful to others; God will be merciful to them!
So then, the eye cannot say to the hand, I don't need you! Nor can the head say to the feet, Well, I don't need you!
Be on watch and pray always that you will have the strength to go safely through all those things that will happen and to stand before the Son of Man.
The officer took him, led him to the commander, and said, The prisoner Paul called me and asked me to bring this young man to you, because he has something to say to you.
But how terrible for you who are rich now; you have had your easy life!
endurance brings God's approval, and his approval creates hope.
But you are the chosen race, the King's priests, the holy nation, God's own people, chosen to proclaim the wonderful acts of God, who called you out of darkness into his own marvelous light.
Because of this, many of Jesus' followers turned back and would not go with him any more.
That is the gospel, the message that I preached to you. You are saved by the gospel if you hold firmly to it -- unless it was for nothing that you believed.
Indeed, you are our pride and our joy!
Slaves belonging to Christian masters must not despise them, for they are believers too. Instead, they are to serve them even better, because those who benefit from their work are believers whom they love.You must teach and preach these things.
When they bring you to be tried in the synagogues or before governors or rulers, do not be worried about how you will defend yourself or what you will say.
An angel of the Lord said to Philip, Get ready and go south to the road that goes from Jerusalem to Gaza. (This road is not used nowadays.)
Your life here on earth has been full of luxury and pleasure. You have made yourselves fat for the day of slaughter.
When the baby was a week old, they came to circumcise him, and they were going to name him Zechariah, after his father.
In the same way, he gave them the cup after the supper, saying, This cup is God's new covenant sealed with my blood, which is poured out for you.
Each one of us has received a special gift in proportion to what Christ has given.
And a voice came from heaven, You are my own dear Son. I am pleased with you.
Then the disciples understood that he was talking to them about John the Baptist.
Now, it is clear that no one is put right with God by means of the Law, because the scripture says, Only the person who is put right with God through faith shall live.
Pay, then, what you owe them; pay them your personal and property taxes, and show respect and honor for them all.
and made his home in a town named Nazareth. And so what the prophets had said came true: He will be called a Nazarene.
When they arrived at Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues. They had John Mark with them to help in the work.
There was a woman who had suffered terribly from severe bleeding for twelve years,
Jesus stopped and said, Call him. So they called the blind man. Cheer up! they said. Get up, he is calling you.
In the days after that time of trouble the sun will grow dark, the moon will no longer shine,
They both lived good lives in God's sight and obeyed fully all the Lord's laws and commands.
The disciples looked at one another, completely puzzled about whom he meant.
Your hearts and minds must be made completely new,
God will bless you for this, if you endure the pain of undeserved suffering because you are conscious of his will.
Don't you understand yet? Don't you remember when I broke the five loaves for the five thousand men? How many baskets did you fill?
If he has done you any wrong or owes you anything, charge it to my account.
yet because of all the trouble this widow is giving me, I will see to it that she gets her rights. If I don't, she will keep on coming and finally wear me out!
After all, it is you -- you, no less than others! -- who are our hope, our joy, and our reason for boasting of our victory in the presence of our Lord Jesus when he comes.
Peter stayed on in Joppa for many days with a tanner of leather named Simon.
The next day the large crowd that had come to the Passover Festival heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem.
Jacob's sons became jealous of their brother Joseph and sold him to be a slave in Egypt. But God was with him
He tricked our ancestors and was cruel to them, forcing them to put their babies out of their homes, so that they would die.
Six days later Jesus took with him Peter and the brothers James and John and led them up a high mountain where they were alone.
But the Lord has reduced the number of those days; if he had not, nobody would survive. For the sake of his chosen people, however, he has reduced those days.
and the enemy who sowed the weeds is the Devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the harvest workers are angels. 
then we who are living at that time will be gathered up along with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we will always be with the Lord.
He saw a fig tree by the side of the road and went to it, but found nothing on it except leaves. So he said to the tree, You will never again bear fruit! At once the fig tree dried up.
Leave all your worries with him, because he cares for you.
Then the curtain hanging in the Temple was torn in two from top to bottom. The earth shook, the rocks split apart,
Well done, he said; you are a good servant! Since you were faithful in small matters, I will put you in charge of ten cities.
They took the young man home alive and were greatly comforted.
Be happy and glad, for a great reward is kept for you in heaven. This is how the prophets who lived before you were persecuted.
So then, our friends, stand firm and hold on to those truths which we taught you, both in our preaching and in our letter.
Salvation is to be found through him alone; in all the world there is no one else whom God has given who can save us.
He rescued Lot, a good man, who was distressed by the immoral conduct of lawless people.
I gave them the message that you gave me, and they received it; they know that it is true that I came from you, and they believe that you sent me.
Do not add any widow to the list of widows unless she is over sixty years of age. In addition, she must have been married only once
For it is not by hearing the Law that people are put right with God, but by doing what the Law commands.
God sent his messenger, a man named John,
And goodness is the harvest that is produced from the seeds the peacemakers plant in peace.
Jesus answered, Go back and tell John what you are hearing and seeing:
Moses is the one who was rejected by the people of Israel. Who made you ruler and judge over us? they asked. He is the one whom God sent to rule the people and set them free with the help of the angel who appeared to him in the burning bush.
When the people saw Jesus, they were greatly surprised, and ran to him and greeted him.
Then there was a famine all over Egypt and Canaan, which caused much suffering. Our ancestors could not find any food,
When evening came, the owner told his foreman, Call the workers and pay them their wages, starting with those who were hired last and ending with those who were hired first.
It was he who gave gifts to people; he appointed some to be apostles, others to be prophets, others to be evangelists, others to be pastors and teachers.
And now, my friends, I know that what you and your leaders did to Jesus was due to your ignorance.
Suddenly there was a violent earthquake; an angel of the Lord came down from heaven, rolled the stone away, and sat on it.
For the others offered their gifts from what they had to spare of their riches; but she, poor as she is, gave all she had to live on.
For Christ did not go into a Holy Place made by human hands, which was a copy of the real one. He went into heaven itself, where he now appears on our behalf in the presence of God.
One Sabbath Jesus went to eat a meal at the home of one of the leading Pharisees; and people were watching Jesus closely.
They were stoned, they were sawed in two, they were killed by the sword. They went around clothed in skins of sheep or goats -- poor, persecuted, and mistreated.
One day as we were going to the place of prayer, we were met by a young servant woman who had an evil spirit that enabled her to predict the future. She earned a lot of money for her owners by telling fortunes.
However, if the people from Macedonia should come with me and find out that you are not ready, how ashamed we would be -- not to speak of your shame -- for feeling so sure of you!
He said to him, You bad servant! I will use your own words to condemn you! You know that I am a hard man, taking what is not mine and reaping what I have not planted.
So they looked for an opportunity. They bribed some men to pretend they were sincere, and they sent them to trap Jesus with questions, so that they could hand him over to the authority and power of the Roman Governor.
in order to train the younger women to love their husbands and children,
John spoke up, Master, we saw a man driving out demons in your name, and we told him to stop, because he doesn't belong to our group.
He bent over and saw the linen cloths, but he did not go in.
These people are like dried-up springs, like clouds blown along by a storm; God has reserved a place for them in the deepest darkness.
I am the God of your ancestors, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Moses trembled with fear and dared not look.
Do not love the world or anything that belongs to the world. If you love the world, you do not love the Father.
Then those who are in Judea must run away to the hills.
And we have seen and tell others that the Father sent his Son to be the Savior of the world.
And I will do whatever you ask for in my name, so that the Father's glory will be shown through the Son.
I have told you this so that you will have peace by being united to me. The world will make you suffer. But be brave! I have defeated the world!
All the prophets spoke about him, saying that all who believe in him will have their sins forgiven through the power of his name.
For those who reject the Son reject also the Father; those who accept the Son have the Father also.
They insulted him and said, You are that fellow's disciple; but we are Moses' disciples.
But Paul said to the army officer and soldiers, If the sailors don't stay on board, you have no hope of being saved.
he asked them, Do you want me to set free for you the king of the Jews?
First, Moses proclaimed to the people all the commandments as set forth in the Law. Then he took the blood of bulls and goats, mixed it with water, and sprinkled it on the book of the Law and all the people, using a sprig of hyssop and some red wool.
Greetings to Herodion, a fellow Jew, and to the Christians in the family of Narcissus.
If the owner of a house knew the time when the thief would come, you can be sure that he would stay awake and not let the thief break into his house.
Now King Herod heard about all this, because Jesus' reputation had spread everywhere. Some people were saying, John the Baptist has come back to life! That is why he has this power to perform miracles.
Then those who are now last will be first, and those who are now first will be last.
He also said to them, Pay attention to what you hear! The same rules you use to judge others will be used by God to judge you -- but with even greater severity.
And you, too, must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour when you are not expecting him.
When John came, he fasted and drank no wine, and everyone said, He has a demon in him!
I myself was once alive apart from law; but when the commandment came, sin sprang to life,
I will do my best, then, to provide a way for you to remember these matters at all times after my death.
For we fix our attention, not on things that are seen, but on things that are unseen. What can be seen lasts only for a time, but what cannot be seen lasts forever.
We have a great priest in charge of the house of God.
In the meantime Saul kept up his violent threats of murder against the followers of the Lord. He went to the High Priest
Listen, then, if you have ears!
There are different kinds of spiritual gifts, but the same Spirit gives them.
How glad and happy you will be, and how happy many others will be when he is born! 
Can anything good come from Nazareth? Nathanael asked. Come and see, answered Philip.
So a man who prays or proclaims God's message in public worship with his head covered disgraces Christ.
In planning this, did I appear fickle? When I make my plans, do I make them from selfish motives, ready to say Yes, yes and No, no at the same time?
and so reveal their secret thoughts. And sorrow, like a sharp sword, will break your own heart.
At one time you were not God's people, but now you are his people; at one time you did not know God's mercy, but now you have received his mercy.
Whoever says a word against the Son of Man can be forgiven; but whoever says evil things against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
If you belonged to the world, then the world would love you as its own. But I chose you from this world, and you do not belong to it; that is why the world hates you.
While they were at the table eating, Jesus said, I tell you that one of you will betray me -- one who is eating with me.
The Son of Man came, and he ate and drank, and you said, Look at this man! He is a glutton and wine drinker, a friend of tax collectors and other outcasts!
Those who hate others are murderers, and you know that murderers do not have eternal life in them.
Such teachings are spread by deceitful liars, whose consciences are dead, as if burnt with a hot iron.
The Jewish authorities were looking for him at the festival. Where is he? they asked.
He told them what had happened and sent them off to Joppa.
One day Jesus got into a boat with his disciples and said to them, Let us go across to the other side of the lake. So they started out.
Afterward I went to places in Syria and Cilicia.
And during the time I was with you I did not bother you for help when I needed money; the believers who came from Macedonia brought me everything I needed. As in the past, so in the future: I will never be a burden to you!
This does not mean that anyone has seen the Father; he who is from God is the only one who has seen the Father.
My love be with you all in Christ Jesus.
Those who speak in strange tongues help only themselves, but those who proclaim God's message help the whole church.
As bad as you are, you know how to give good things to your children. How much more, then, will your Father in heaven give good things to those who ask him!
The crowd standing there heard the voice, and some of them said it was thunder, while others said, An angel spoke to him!
And so I tell you, Peter: you are a rock, and on this rock foundation I will build my church, and not even death will ever be able to overcome it.
Some of it fell on rocky ground, and when the plants sprouted, they dried up because the soil had no moisture.
My deep desire and hope is that I shall never fail in my duty, but that at all times, and especially right now, I shall be full of courage, so that with my whole being I shall bring honor to Christ, whether I live or die.
Let us give glory to God! He is able to make you stand firm in your faith, according to the Good News I preach about Jesus Christ and according to the revelation of the secret truth which was hidden for long ages in the past.
How terrible it will be for you, Chorazin! How terrible for you too, Bethsaida! If the miracles which were performed in you had been performed in Tyre and Sidon, the people there would have long ago put on sackcloth and sprinkled ashes on themselves, to show that they had turned from their sins!
Just as I do not belong to the world, they do not belong to the world.
In Samaria he came to a town named Sychar, which was not far from the field that Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
Some in the crowd shouted one thing, others something else. There was such confusion that the commander could not find out exactly what had happened, so he ordered his men to take Paul up into the fort.
No one will say, Look, here it is! or, There it is!'; because the Kingdom of God is within you.
When you give thanks to God in spirit only, how can ordinary people taking part in the meeting say Amen to your prayer of thanksgiving? They have no way of knowing what you are saying.
But as for the Gentiles who have become believers, we have sent them a letter telling them we decided that they must not eat any food that has been offered to idols, or any blood, or any animal that has been strangled, and that they must keep themselves from sexual immorality.
For your sake, my friends, I have applied all this to Apollos and me, using the two of us as an example, so that you may learn what the saying means, Observe the proper rules. None of you should be proud of one person and despise another.
Then I saw in the sky another mysterious sight, great and amazing. There were seven angels with seven plagues, which are the last ones, because they are the final expression of God's anger.
Just as we wear the likeness of the man made of earth, so we will wear the likeness of the Man from heaven.
then the master will come back one day when the servant does not expect him and at a time he does not know. The master will cut him in pieces and make him share the fate of the disobedient.
But those who want to get rich fall into temptation and are caught in the trap of many foolish and harmful desires, which pull them down to ruin and destruction.
Peter answered, I will never say that, even if I have to die with you! And all the other disciples said the same thing.
Right now, however, I am going to Jerusalem in the service of God's people there.
They are the men who have kept themselves pure by not having sexual relations with women; they are virgins. They follow the Lamb wherever he goes. They have been redeemed from the rest of the human race and are the first ones to be offered to God and to the Lamb.
Do not be deceived, my dear friends!
If you ask me for anything in my name, I will do it.
All this I will give you, the Devil said, if you kneel down and worship me.
Then the kings of the earth, the rulers and the military chiefs, the rich and the powerful, and all other people, slave and free, hid themselves in caves and under rocks on the mountains.
In the same way you husbands must live with your wives with the proper understanding that they are more delicate than you. Treat them with respect, because they also will receive, together with you, God's gift of life. Do this so that nothing will interfere with your prayers.
Then Jesus was taken to the High Priest's house, where all the chief priests, the elders, and the teachers of the Law were gathering.
He who gives his testimony to all this says, Yes indeed! I am coming soon! So be it. Come, Lord Jesus!
One day Zechariah was doing his work as a priest in the Temple, taking his turn in the daily service.
The Son of Man must be handed over to sinners, be crucified, and three days later rise to life.
There were more than forty who planned this together.
But some of them were stubborn and would not believe, and before the whole group they said evil things about the Way of the Lord. So Paul left them and took the believers with him, and every day he held discussions in the lecture hall of Tyrannus.
Your brother has come back home, the servant answered, and your father has killed the prize calf, because he got him back safe and sound.
He said this because Jesus had ordered the evil spirit to go out of him. Many times it had seized him, and even though he was kept a prisoner, his hands and feet tied with chains, he would break the chains and be driven by the demon out into the desert.
When they arrived in Antioch, they gathered the people of the church together and told them about all that God had done with them and how he had opened the way for the Gentiles to believe.
Seeing how much faith they had, Jesus said to the paralyzed man, My son, your sins are forgiven.
For we have heard the Good News, just as they did. They heard the message, but it did them no good, because when they heard it, they did not accept it with faith.
For the saying is true, Someone plants, someone else reaps.
Or is God the God of the Jews only? Is he not the God of the Gentiles also? Of course he is.
We know that what the scripture says is true forever; and God called those people gods, the people to whom his message was given.
Dear Theophilus: In my first book I wrote about all the things that Jesus did and taught from the time he began his work
They called the apostles in, had them whipped, and ordered them never again to speak in the name of Jesus; and then they set them free.
Then some people brought to Jesus a man who was blind and could not talk because he had a demon. Jesus healed the man, so that he was able to talk and see.
Treat her exactly as she has treated you; pay her back double for all she has done. Fill her cup with a drink twice as strong as the drink she prepared for you.
Many who heard Jesus say these things believed in him.
But when they believed Philip's message about the good news of the Kingdom of God and about Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
It was Enoch, the seventh direct descendant from Adam, who long ago prophesied this about them: The Lord will come with many thousands of his holy angels
I tell you that many prophets and kings wanted to see what you see, but they could not, and to hear what you hear, but they did not.
So then, the gift of speaking in strange tongues is proof for unbelievers, not for believers, while the gift of proclaiming God's message is proof for believers, not for unbelievers.
The king was very angry, and he sent the servant to jail to be punished until he should pay back the whole amount.
No servant can be the slave of two masters; such a slave will hate one and love the other or will be loyal to one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money.
but those who drink the water that I will give them will never be thirsty again. The water that I will give them will become in them a spring which will provide them with life-giving water and give them eternal life.
The men who had been taking care of the pigs ran away and went into the town, where they told the whole story and what had happened to the men with the demons.
But now I tell you: love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you,
W_ hat we are teaching you now is the Lord's teaching: we who are alive on the day the Lord comes will not go ahead of those who have died.
Then I said, Here I am, to do your will, O God, just as it is written of me in the book of the Law.
May God's grace be with all those who love our Lord Jesus Christ with undying love.
For God's Kingdom is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of the righteousness, peace, and joy which the Holy Spirit gives.
Then they picked up stones to throw at him, but Jesus hid himself and left the Temple.
(:)
When his family heard about it, they set out to take charge of him, because people were saying, He's gone mad!
We said good-bye to them and left. After sailing straight across, we came to Cos; the next day we reached Rhodes, and from there we went on to Patara.
He said, I promise you that I will bless you and give you many descendants.
And so I beg you to let him know that you really do love him.
But when they did not find them, they dragged Jason and some other believers before the city authorities and shouted, These men have caused trouble everywhere! Now they have come to our city,
and you have been given full life in union with him. He is supreme over every spiritual ruler and authority.
The following day he arrived in Caesarea, where Cornelius was waiting for him, together with relatives and close friends that he had invited.
Whoever sins is guilty of breaking God's law, because sin is a breaking of the law.
How happy you are to believe that the Lord's message to you will come true!
Actually I would prefer that all of you were as I am; but each one has a special gift from God, one person this gift, another one that gift.
Come and eat the flesh of kings, generals, and soldiers, the flesh of horses and their riders, the flesh of all people, slave and free, great and small!
For even if that letter of mine made you sad, I am not sorry I wrote it. I could have been sorry when I saw that it made you sad for a while.
A woman there had an evil spirit that had kept her sick for eighteen years; she  was bent over and could not straighten up at all.
Countries will fight each other; kingdoms will attack one another. There will be famines and earthquakes everywhere.
The soldiers made a plan to kill all the prisoners, in order to keep them from swimming ashore and escaping.
In the same way that the prophet Jonah was a sign for the people of Nineveh, so the Son of Man will be a sign for the people of this day.
Jesus was still speaking when Judas, one of the twelve disciples, arrived. With him was a large crowd armed with swords and clubs and sent by the chief priests and the elders.
This Melchizedek was king of Salem and a priest of the Most High God. As Abraham was coming back from the battle in which he defeated the four kings, Melchizedek met him and blessed him,
as you offer them the message of life. If you do so, I shall have reason to be proud of you on the Day of Christ, because it will show that all my effort and work have not been wasted.
The jailer called for a light, rushed in, and fell trembling at the feet of Paul and Silas.
In union with him you too are being built together with all the others into a place where God lives through his Spirit.
Before all these things take place, however, you will be arrested and persecuted; you will be handed over to be tried in synagogues and be put in prison; you will be brought before kings and rulers for my sake.
Whoever believes that Jesus is the Messiah is a child of God; and whoever loves a father loves his child also.
Then Jesus went into the official's house. When he saw the musicians for the funeral and the people all stirred up,
Indeed he was sick and almost died. But God had pity on him, and not only on him but on me, too, and spared me an even greater sorrow.
Jesus left that place and went off to the territory near the cities of Tyre and Sidon.
When you were the slaves of sin, you were free from righteousness.
My friends, if someone is caught in any kind of wrongdoing, those of you who are spiritual should set him right; but you must do it in a gentle way. And keep an eye on yourselves, so that you will not be tempted, too.
Their conduct shows that what the Law commands is written in their hearts. Their consciences also show that this is true, since their thoughts sometimes accuse them and sometimes defend them.
One day when Jesus was teaching, some Pharisees and teachers of the Law were sitting there who had come from every town in Galilee and Judea and from Jerusalem. The power of the Lord was present for Jesus to heal the sick.
When Peter saw him, he asked Jesus, Lord, what about this man?
And so I write to all of you in Rome whom God loves and has called to be his own people: May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.
For the days are coming when people will say, How lucky are the women who never had children, who never bore babies, who never nursed them!
From there we went inland to Philippi, a city of the first district of Macedonia; it is also a Roman colony. We spent several days there.
Listen, then, and learn what the parable of the sower means. 
We know that we belong to God even though the whole world is under the rule of the Evil One.
Led by the Spirit, Simeon went into the Temple. When the parents brought the child Jesus into the Temple to do for him what the Law required,
And then they abandoned their faith! It is impossible to bring them back to repent again, because they are again crucifying the Son of God and exposing him to public shame.
and no longer hold on to Jewish legends and to human commandments which come from people who have rejected the truth.
(Philip was from Bethsaida, the town where Andrew and Peter lived.)
For all of us must appear before Christ, to be judged by him. We will each receive what we deserve, according to everything we have done, good or bad, in our bodily life.
For as you eat, you each go ahead with your own meal, so that some are hungry while others get drunk.
The people who are trying to force you to be circumcised are the ones who want to show off and boast about external matters. They do it, however, only so that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.
But now, Jesus has been given priestly work which is superior to theirs, just as the covenant which he arranged between God and his people is a better one, because it is based on promises of better things.
We sailed from Philippi after the Festival of Unleavened Bread, and five days later we joined them in Troas, where we spent a week.
This is a symbol which points to the present time. It means that the offerings and animal sacrifices presented to God cannot make the worshiper's heart perfect,
The people asked him, What are we to do, then?
That is why many of you are sick and weak, and several have died.
You must not tell me what to do, Jesus replied. My time has not yet come.
Be happy with those who are happy, weep with those who weep.
It was faith that made Abraham obey when God called him to go out to a country which God had promised to give him. He left his own country without knowing where he was going.
Keep your roots deep in him, build your lives on him, and become stronger in your faith, as you were taught. And be filled with thanksgiving.
He has been raised to the right side of God, his Father, and has received from him the Holy Spirit, as he had promised. What you now see and hear is his gift that he has poured out on us.
But what crime has he committed? Pilate asked. They shouted all the louder, Crucify him!
And the tongue is like a fire. It is a world of wrong, occupying its place in our bodies and spreading evil through our whole being. It sets on fire the entire course of our existence with the fire that comes to it from hell itself.
As soon as Jesus saw them, he called them; they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and went with Jesus.
A man in the crowd answered, Teacher, I brought my son to you,  because he has an evil spirit in him and cannot talk.
They were terrified, thinking that they were seeing a ghost.
But to this very day I have been helped by God, and so I stand here giving my witness to all, to small and great alike. What I say is the very same thing which the prophets and Moses said was going to happen:
To him be the power forever! Amen.
This, then, is how you should pray: Our Father in heaven: May your holy name be honored;
Do I imply, then, that an idol or the food offered to it really amounts to anything?
He answered John's messengers, Go back and tell John what you have seen and heard: the blind can see, the lame can walk, those who suffer from dreaded skin diseases are made clean, the deaf can hear, the dead are raised to life, and the Good News is preached to the poor.
He answered, Whoever has two shirts must give one to the man who has none, and whoever has food must share it.
did John's right to baptize come from God or from human beings?
That is why I write this while I am away from you; it is so that when I arrive I will not have to deal harshly with you in using the authority that the Lord has given me -- authority to build you up, not to tear you down.
Jesus was surprised when he heard this; he turned around and said to the crowd following him, I tell you, I have never found faith like this, not even in Israel!
He said this, not because he cared about the poor, but because he was a thief. He carried the money bag and would help himself from it.
Then Jesus told them this parable: There was once a man who had a fig tree growing in his vineyard. He went looking for figs on it but found none.
And he said to them, I am telling you the truth: you will see heaven open and God's angels going up and coming down on the Son of Man.
They passed by the first guard station and then the second, and came at last to the iron gate that opens into the city. The gate opened for them by itself, and they went out. They walked down a street, and suddenly the angel left Peter.
So then, you are no longer a slave but a child. And since you are his child, God will give you all that he has for his children.
When did we ever see you sick or in prison, and visit you?
For we brought the Good News to you, not with words only, but also with power and the Holy Spirit, and with complete conviction of its truth. You know how we lived when we were with you; it was for your own good.
Jesus took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the village. After spitting on the man's eyes, Jesus placed his hands on him and asked him, Can you see anything?
They arrived once again in Jerusalem. As Jesus was walking in the Temple, the chief priests, the teachers of the Law, and the elders came to him
Because they do this, God has given them over to shameful passions. Even the women pervert the natural use of their sex by unnatural acts.
In the synagogue was a man who had the spirit of an evil demon in him; he screamed out in a loud voice,
Make the people sit down, Jesus told them. (There was a lot of grass there.) So all the people sat down; there were about five thousand men.
Behind him came Simon Peter, and he went straight into the tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying there
We have many parts in the one body, and all these parts have different functions.
He will come and kill those men, and turn the vineyard over to other tenants. When the people heard this, they said, Surely not!
and he ordered those who sold the pigeons, Take them out of here! Stop making my Father's house a marketplace!
Do not be like them. Your Father already knows what you need before you ask him.
Remember Jesus Christ, who was raised from death, who was a descendant of David, as is taught in the Good News I preach.
I can assure you that they are deeply devoted to God; but their devotion is not based on true knowledge. 
Then Jesus ordered them, Do not tell anyone about me.
But he has always given evidence of his existence by the good things he does: he gives you rain from heaven and crops at the right times; he gives you food and fills your hearts with happiness.
Jesus and his disciples sailed on over to the territory of Gerasa, which is across the lake from Galilee.
For the devout women of the past who placed their hope in God used to make themselves beautiful by submitting themselves to their husbands.
The disciples saw this and became angry. Why all this waste? they asked.
For as I walked through your city and looked at the places where you worship, I found an altar on which is written, To an Unknown God. That which you worship, then, even though you do not know it, is what I now proclaim to you.
and every time I pray for you all, I pray with joy
He made this very clear to them. So Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. 
But if you do not have them, you are so shortsighted that you cannot see and have forgotten that you have been purified from your past sins.
But Jesus gave a deep groan and said, Why do the people of this day ask for a miracle? No, I tell you! No such proof will be given to these people!
You make judgments in a purely human way; I pass judgment on no one.
Jesus said, My kingdom does not belong to this world; if my kingdom belonged to this world, my followers would fight to keep me from being handed over to the Jewish authorities. No, my kingdom does not belong here!
Avoid immorality. Any other sin a man commits does not affect his body; but the man who is guilty of sexual immorality sins against his own body.
For you gladly tolerate anyone who comes to you and preaches a different Jesus, not the one we preached; and you accept a spirit and a gospel completely different from the Spirit and the gospel you received from us!
The Spirit took control of me, and the angel carried me to the top of a very high mountain. He showed me Jerusalem, the Holy City, coming down out of heaven from God
Alexander the metalworker did me great harm; the Lord will reward him according to what he has done.
My friends, remember the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord. Take them as examples of patient endurance under suffering.
- There was a very old prophet, a widow named Anna, daughter of Phanuel of the tribe of Asher. She had been married for only seven years and was now eighty-four years old. She never left the Temple; day and night she worshiped God, fasting and praying.
Unless this man came from God, he would not be able to do a thing.
Yet when he received the news that Lazarus was sick, he stayed where he was for two more days.
If I testify on my own behalf, what I say is not to be accepted as real proof.
The Jews joined in the accusation and said that all this was true.
It was the fifteenth year of the rule of Emperor Tiberius; Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, Herod was ruler of Galilee, and his brother Philip was ruler of the territory of Iturea and Trachonitis; Lysanias was ruler of Abilene,
There has been enough time for you to be teachers -- yet you still need someone to teach you the first lessons of God's message. Instead of eating solid food, you still have to drink milk.
At that time some people were there who told Jesus about the Galileans whom Pilate had killed while they were offering sacrifices to God.
Dear friends, let us love one another, because love comes from God. Whoever loves is a child of God and knows God.
For those who ask will receive, and those who seek will find, and the door will be opened to anyone who knocks.
From the time John preached his message until this very day the Kingdom of heaven has suffered violent attacks, and violent men try to seize it.
Jesus said to them, You can be sure that when the Son of Man sits on his glorious throne in the New Age, then you twelve followers of mine will also sit on thrones, to rule the twelve tribes of Israel.
my persecutions, and my sufferings. You know all that happened to me in Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra, the terrible persecutions I endured! But the Lord rescued me from them all.
He won God's favor and asked God to allow him to provide a dwelling place for the God of Jacob.
In this way you will be given the full right to enter the eternal Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Jesus answered them, I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.
because our God is indeed a destroying fire.
So Jesus said to her, Because of that answer, go back home, where you will find that the demon has gone out of your daughter!
At once something like fish scales fell from Saul's eyes, and he was able to see again. He stood up and was baptized;
Do for others just what you want them to do for you.
We came to where we could see Cyprus, and then sailed south of it on to Syria. We went ashore at Tyre, where the ship was going to unload its cargo.
The High Priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching.
For sin pays its wage -- death; but God's free gift is eternal life in union with Christ Jesus our Lord.
But if someone tells you, This food was offered to idols, then do not eat that food, for the sake of the one who told you and for conscience sake --
I know what you have done; I know that you are neither cold nor hot. How I wish you were either one or the other!
I tell you this not as an order, but simply as a permission.
And he said to them, Keep watch, and pray that you will not fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
And for this reason a man will leave his father and mother and unite with his wife,
Then Jesus went to Capernaum, a town in Galilee, where he taught the people on the Sabbath.
Then the seventh angel poured out his bowl in the air. A loud voice came from the throne in the temple, saying, It is done!
You will always have poor people with you, but you will not always have me.
No indeed! And I tell you that if you do not turn from your sins, you will all die as they did. 
In past times human beings were not told this secret, but God has revealed it now by the Spirit to his holy apostles and prophets.
Instead, your beauty should consist of your true inner self, the ageless beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is of the greatest value in God's sight.
You have brought these men here even though they have not robbed temples or said evil things about our goddess.
And if anyone says anything, tell him, The Master needs them'; and then he will let them go at once.
you are sure that you are a guide for the blind, a light for those who are in darkness,
We love because God first loved us.
He was circumcised later, and his circumcision was a sign to show that because of his faith God had accepted him as righteous before he had been circumcised. And so Abraham is the spiritual father of all who believe in God and are accepted as righteous by him, even though they are not circumcised.
They said to him, Now we know for sure that you have a demon! Abraham died, and the prophets died, yet you say that whoever obeys your teaching will never die.
What about you? he asked them. Who do you say I am? Peter answered, You are the Messiah.
We receive from him whatever we ask, because we obey his commands and do what pleases him.
Jesus said to them, I am telling you the truth: if you do not eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you will not have life in yourselves.
Don't be afraid, Jesus told them, it is I!
And our Lord, of whom these things are said, belonged to a different tribe, and no member of his tribe ever served as a priest.
with a flaming fire, to punish those who reject God and who do not obey the Good News about our Lord Jesus.
Some Jews who traveled around and drove out evil spirits also tried to use the name of the Lord Jesus to do this. They said to the evil spirits, I command you in the name of Jesus, whom Paul preaches.
because they could not bear the order which said, If even an animal touches the mountain, it must be stoned to death.
Go in through the narrow gate, because the gate to hell is wide and the road that leads to it is easy, and there are many who travel it.
Paul gathered up a bundle of sticks and was putting them on the fire when a snake came out on account of the heat and fastened itself to his hand.
This is how it will be when the dead are raised to life. When the body is buried, it is mortal; when raised, it will be immortal.
So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him, shouting, Praise God! God bless him who comes in the name of the Lord! God bless the King of Israel!
and asked him, What right do you have to do these things? Who gave you such right?
Jesus got into one of the boats -- it belonged to Simon -- and asked him to push off a little from the shore. Jesus sat in the boat and taught the crowd.
With my own eyes I have seen your salvation, 
But because there is so much immorality, every man should have his own wife, and every woman should have her own husband.
But if we hate others, we are in the darkness; we walk in it and do not know where we are going, because the darkness has made us blind.
But if they walk during the night they stumble, because they have no light.
When evening came, Jesus' disciples went down to the lake,
If you become angry, do not let your anger lead you into sin, and do not stay angry all day.
The next day Paul went with us to see James; and all the church elders were present.
they will hold to the outward form of our religion, but reject its real power. Keep away from such people.
But the heavens and the earth that now exist are being preserved by the same command of God, in order to be destroyed by fire. They are being kept for the day when godless people will be judged and destroyed.
In the past God spoke to our ancestors many times and in many ways through the prophets,
They exchange the truth about God for a lie; they worship and serve what God has created instead of the Creator himself, who is to be praised forever! Amen.
Then Peter stood up with the other eleven apostles and in a loud voice began to speak to the crowd: Fellow Jews and all of you who live in Jerusalem, listen to me and let me tell you what this means.
So then, my friends, we have an obligation, but it is not to live as our human nature wants us to.
We did this, not because we do not have the right to demand our support; we did it to be an example for you to follow.
When the time came to gather the grapes, he sent his slaves to the tenants to receive his share of the harvest.
Those who think highly of a certain day do so in honor of the Lord; those who will eat anything do so in honor of the Lord, because they give thanks to God for the food. Those who refuse to eat certain things do so in honor of the Lord, and they give thanks to God.
How terrible for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees! You hypocrites! You are like whitewashed tombs, which look fine on the outside but are full of bones and decaying corpses on the inside.
I was hungry but you would not feed me, thirsty but you would not give me a drink;
How terrible for you teachers of the Law! You have kept the key that opens  the door to the house of knowledge; you yourselves will not go in, and you stop those who are trying to go in!
Peter knocked at the outside door, and a servant named Rhoda came to answer it.
As they left the boat, people recognized Jesus at once.
Those helpers who do their work well win for themselves a good standing and are able to speak boldly about their faith in Christ Jesus.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
wherever people don't welcome you, leave that town and shake the dust off your feet as a warning to them.
So then, those who suffer because it is God's will for them, should by their good actions trust themselves completely to their Creator, who always keeps his promise.
You have come to the joyful gathering of God's first-born, whose names are written in heaven. You have come to God, who is the judge of all people, and to the spirits of good people made perfect.
After three days Paul called the local Jewish leaders to a meeting. When they had gathered, he said to them, My fellow Israelites, even though I did nothing against our people or the customs that we received from our ancestors, I was made a prisoner in Jerusalem and handed over to the Romans.
May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, my friends. Amen.
Because we have this hope, we are very bold.
All of you are people who belong to the light, who belong to the day. We do not belong to the night or to the darkness.
People will hand over their own brothers to be put to death, and fathers will do the same to their children; children will turn against their parents and have them put to death.
But avoid stupid arguments, long lists of ancestors, quarrels, and fights about the Law. They are useless and worthless.
The Gentiles do not have the Law; but whenever they do by instinct what the Law commands, they are their own law, even though they do not have the Law.
This is the Good News about Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
They did this, then, and sent the money to the church elders by Barnabas and Saul.
They went ahead and waited for us in Troas.
and you will have authority to drive out demons.
As the scripture says, You have found out for yourselves how kind the Lord is.
(There were about five thousand men there.) Jesus said to his disciples, Make the people sit down in groups of about fifty each.
He sleeps at night, is up and about during the day, and all the while the seeds are sprouting and growing. Yet he does not know how it happens.
You began to build but can't finish the job! they will say.
Two days later there was a wedding in the town of Cana in Galilee. Jesus' mother was there,
That is what I did in Jerusalem. I received authority from the chief priests and put many of God's people in prison; and when they were sentenced to death, I also voted against them.
Now go to the main streets and invite to the feast as many people as you find. 
The apostles shook the dust off their feet in protest against them and went on to Iconium.
You killed the one who leads to life, but God raised him from death -- and we are witnesses to this.
They promise them freedom while they themselves are slaves of destructive habits -- for we are slaves of anything that has conquered us.
You are looking at the outward appearance of things. Are there some there who reckon themselves to belong to Christ? Well, let them think again about themselves, because we belong to Christ just as much as they do.
I see you are a prophet, sir, the woman said.
Put all things to the test: keep what is good
While working with the Jews, I live like a Jew in order to win them; and even though I myself am not subject to the Law of Moses, I live as though I were when working with those who are, in order to win them.
On a chosen day Herod put on his royal robes, sat on his throne, and made a speech to the people.
And this is what will prove it to you: you will find a baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger.
I know that good does not live in me -- that is, in my human nature. For even though the desire to do good is in me, I am not able to do it.
Then I saw another mighty angel coming down out of heaven. He was wrapped in a cloud and had a rainbow around his head; his face was like the sun, and his legs were like columns of fire.
What do you think about the Messiah? Whose descendant is he? He is David's descendant, they answered.
And so we have met together and have all agreed to choose some messengers and send them to you. They will go with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul,
This, then, was the third time Jesus appeared to the disciples after he was raised from death.
For indeed Herod and Pontius Pilate met together in this city with the Gentiles and the people of Israel against Jesus, your holy Servant, whom you made Messiah.
Our friends, we must thank God at all times for you. It is right for us to do so, because your faith is growing so much and the love each of you has for the others is becoming greater.
I have sinned by betraying an innocent man to death! he said. What do we care about that? they answered. That is your business!
But the Most High God does not live in houses built by human hands; as the prophet says,
-So Philip got ready and went. Now an Ethiopian eunuch, who was an important official in charge of the treasury of the queen of Ethiopia, was on his way home. He had been to Jerusalem to worship God and was going back home in his carriage. As he rode along, he was reading from the book of the prophet Isaiah.
At last the city clerk was able to calm the crowd. Fellow Ephesians! he said. Everyone knows that the city of Ephesus is the keeper of the temple of the great Artemis and of the sacred stone that fell down from heaven.
You are to open their eyes and turn them from the darkness to the light and from the power of Satan to God, so that through their faith in me they will have their sins forgiven and receive their place among God's chosen people.
Jesus and his disciples went away to Lake Galilee, and a large crowd followed him. They had come from Galilee, from Judea,
All they had were some arguments with him about their own religion and about a man named Jesus, who has died; but Paul claims that he is alive.
At that time there was a man named Simeon living in Jerusalem. He was a good, God-fearing man and was waiting for Israel to be saved. The Holy Spirit was with him
and brought him safely through all his troubles. When Joseph appeared before the king of Egypt, God gave him a pleasing manner and wisdom, and the king made Joseph governor over the country and the royal household.
Then he pointed to his disciples and said, Look! Here are my mother and my brothers!
So the officer went off with his men and brought the apostles back. They did not use force, however, because they were afraid that the people might stone them.
Go, then, to all peoples everywhere and make them my disciples: baptize them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
This was done by the Lord; what a wonderful sight it is!
Let us go forward! And this is what we will do, if God allows.
the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
Paul stood up in front of the city council and said, I see that in every way you Athenians are very religious.
(In saying this, Jesus was indicating the way in which Peter would die and bring glory to God.) Then Jesus said to him, Follow me!
Then Paul was called in, and Tertullus began to make his accusation, as follows: Your Excellency! Your wise leadership has brought us a long period of peace, and many necessary reforms are being made for the good of our country.
A man named Lazarus, who lived in Bethany, became sick. Bethany was the town where Mary and her sister Martha lived.
-And we are here to bring the Good News to you: what God promised our ancestors he would do, he has now done for us, who are their descendants, by raising Jesus to life. As it is written in the second Psalm, You are my Son; today I have become your Father.
They asked him, Who is the man who told you to do this?
As he did so, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb. Each had a harp and gold bowls filled with incense, which are the prayers of God's people.
and said, Save yourself if you are the king of the Jews!
But Jesus became a priest by means of a vow when God said to him, The Lord has made a solemn promise and will not take it back: You will be a priest forever.
It must be remembered, of course, that laws are made, not for good people, but for lawbreakers and criminals, for the godless and sinful, for those who are not religious or spiritual, for those who kill their fathers or mothers, for murderers,
In union with Christ and through our faith in him we have the boldness to go into God's presence with all confidence.
Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the wife of Zebedee.
The second horror is over, but the third horror will come soon!
There will be strange things happening to the sun, the moon, and the stars. On earth whole countries will be in despair, afraid of the roar of the sea and the raging tides.
We know that God spoke to Moses; as for that fellow, however, we do not even know where he comes from!
For it is by God's grace that you have been saved through faith. It is not the result of your own efforts, but God's gift, so that no one can boast about it.
Jesus was still speaking when a crowd arrived, led by Judas, one of the twelve disciples. He came up to Jesus to kiss him.
It will be like a man who goes away from home on a trip and leaves his servants in charge, after giving to each one his own work to do and after telling the doorkeeper to keep watch.
Soon afterward Mary got ready and hurried off to a town in the hill country of Judea.
For the law of the Spirit, which brings us life in union with Christ Jesus, has set me free from the law of sin and death.
Listen! I stand at the door and knock; if any hear my voice and open the door, I will come into their house and eat with them, and they will eat with me.
Happy are those who mourn; God will comfort them!
Or perhaps you don't know that the man who joins his body to a prostitute becomes physically one with her? The scripture says quite plainly, The two will become one body.
I tell you indeed: the punishment for all these murders will fall on the people of this day!
John answered, I baptize with water, but among you stands the one you do not know.
We arrived in the city of Syracuse and stayed there for three days.
The second most important commandment is this: Love your neighbor as you love yourself. There is no other commandment more important than these two.
I am telling you the truth: whoever receives anyone I send receives me also; and whoever receives me receives him who sent me.
He had a small scroll open in his hand. He put his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the land,
Since it was the day before the Sabbath and because the tomb was close by, they placed Jesus' body there.
Why is this foreigner the only one who came back to give thanks to God?
In the Lord's name, then, I warn you: do not continue to live like the heathen, whose thoughts are worthless
For the full content of divine nature lives in Christ, in his humanity,
Go quickly now, and tell his disciples, He has been raised from death, and now he is going to Galilee ahead of you; there you will see him! Remember what I have told you.
Peter began to speak: I now realize that it is true that God treats everyone on the same basis.
Then Mary took a whole pint of a very expensive perfume made of pure nard, poured it on Jesus' feet, and wiped them with her hair. The sweet smell of the perfume filled the whole house.
For it was not David who went up into heaven; rather he said, The Lord said to my Lord: Sit here at my right side
Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life. Those who believe in me will live, even though they die;
Nor are all of Abraham's descendants the children of God. God said to Abraham, It is through Isaac that you will have the descendants I promised you.
They started discussing among themselves, He says this because we didn't bring any bread.
If what was built on the foundation survives the fire, the builder will receive a reward.
Jesus went on into Jericho and was passing through.
Then Jesus said to them, This very night all of you will run away and leave me, for the scripture says, God will kill the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.
Then the one who sits on the throne said, And now I make all things new! He also said to me, Write this, because these words are true and can be trusted.
How dare you say to your brother, Please, let me take that speck out of your eye, when you have a log in your own eye?
They came to a place called Gethsemane, and Jesus said to his disciples, Sit here while I pray.
No one, then, should boast about what human beings can do. Actually everything belongs to you:
But if a man, without being forced to do so, has firmly made up his mind not to marry, and if he has his will under complete control and has already decided in his own mind what to do -- then he does well not to marry the young woman.
The man looked up and said, Yes, I can see people, but they look like trees walking around. 
Just as the Father is himself the source of life, in the same way he has made his Son to be the source of life.
When evening came, the boat was in the middle of the lake, while Jesus was alone on land.
Jesus entered Jerusalem, went into the Temple, and looked around at everything. But since it was already late in the day, he went out to Bethany with the twelve disciples.
and said, Sir, we remember that while that liar was still alive he said, I will be raised to life three days later.
Then the Lamb broke open the fifth seal. I saw underneath the altar the souls of those who had been killed because they had proclaimed God's word and had been faithful in their witnessing.
He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul! Why do you persecute me?
To show that you are his children, God sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, the Spirit who cries out, Father, my Father.
To the church of God which is in Corinth, to all who are called to be God's holy people, who belong to him in union with Christ Jesus, together with all people everywhere who worship our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours:
She touched his cloak, and her bleeding stopped at once; and she had the feeling inside herself that she was healed of her trouble.
That good man lived among them, and day after day he suffered agony as he saw and heard their evil actions.
There are three witnesses:
Jesus went on to say, The Kingdom of God is like this. A man scatters seed in his field.
I will prove to you, then, that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins. So he said to the paralyzed man,
Jesus drank the wine and said, It is finished! Then he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.
They did not become God's children by natural means, that is, by being born as the children of a human father; God himself was their Father.
He will also keep you firm to the end, so that you will be faultless on the Day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Many miracles and wonders were being done through the apostles, and everyone was filled with awe.
I have sent you to reap a harvest in a field where you did not work; others worked there, and you profit from their work.
When John saw many Pharisees and Sadducees coming to him to be baptized,  he said to them, You snakes -- who told you that you could escape from the punishment God is about to send?
So there was great joy in that city.
I have not wanted anyone's silver or gold or clothing.
And the Lord gives us confidence in you, and we are sure that you are doing and will continue to do what we tell you.
Herod was very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon, so they went in a group to see him. First they convinced Blastus, the man in charge of the palace, that he should help them. Then they went to Herod and asked him for peace, because their country got its food supplies from the king's country.
and when they found him, they said, Everyone is looking for you.
When I have finished this task and have turned over to them all the money that has been raised for them, I shall leave for Spain and visit you on my way there.
But if I do them, even though you do not believe me, you should at least believe my deeds, in order that you may know once and for all that the Father is in me and that I am in the Father.
But they did not understand what this teaching meant, and they were afraid to ask him.
His parents said this because they were afraid of the Jewish authorities, who had already agreed that anyone who said he believed that Jesus was the Messiah would be expelled from the synagogue.
So the spirits begged Jesus, Send us to the pigs, and let us go into them.
We want to remind you, friends, of the trouble we had in the province of Asia. The burdens laid upon us were so great and so heavy that we gave up all hope of staying alive.
The rich man said, Then I beg you, father Abraham, send Lazarus to my father's house,
During those five months they will seek death, but will not find it; they will want to die, but death will flee from them.
They were all amazed at the way he taught, because he spoke with authority.
Then Jesus said to the officer, Go home, and what you believe will be done for you. And the officer's servant was healed that very moment.
Your love, dear brother, has brought me great joy and much encouragement! You have cheered the hearts of all of God's people.
and for many days he appeared to those who had traveled with him from Galilee to Jerusalem. They are now witnesses for him to the people of Israel.
Peter said to them, Each one of you must turn away from your sins and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, so that your sins will be forgiven; and you will receive God's gift, the Holy Spirit.
I looked closely inside and saw domesticated and wild animals, reptiles, and wild birds.
The dragon was furious with the woman and went off to fight against the rest of her descendants, all those who obey God's commandments and are faithful to the truth revealed by Jesus.
And now, in obedience to the Holy Spirit I am going to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there.
Paul answered, I am a Jew, born in Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of an important city. Please let me speak to the people.
Jesus also told them this parable: You don't tear a piece off a new coat to patch up an old coat. If you do, you will  have torn the new coat, and the piece of new cloth will not match the old.
When they stepped ashore, they saw a charcoal fire there with fish on it and some bread.
Well done, you good and faithful servant! said his master. You have been faithful in managing small amounts, so I will put you in charge of large amounts. Come on in and share my happiness!
They strengthened the believers and encouraged them to remain true to the faith. We must pass through many troubles to enter the Kingdom of God, they taught.
A certain young man, dressed only in a linen cloth, was following Jesus. They tried to arrest him,
Then he called his servants and said to them, My wedding feast is ready, but the people I invited did not deserve it.
They brought the colt to Jesus, threw their cloaks over the animal, and Jesus got on. 
Pilate went back into the palace and called Jesus. Are you the king of the Jews? he asked him.
Some of the teachers of the Law spoke up, A good answer, Teacher!
But to keep this matter from spreading any further among the people, let us warn these men never again to speak to anyone in the name of Jesus.
When the wine had given out, Jesus' mother said to him, They are out of wine.
Joshua, also called Justus, sends greetings too. These three are the only Jewish believers who work with me for the Kingdom of God, and they have been a great help to me.
Now, I assure you that wherever this gospel is preached all over the world, what she has done will be told in memory of her.
Then Jesus sent two of them with these instructions: Go into the city, and a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him
This is what the scripture says: If you hear God's voice today, do not be stubborn, as your ancestors were when they rebelled against God.
And I trust in the Lord that I myself will be able to come to you soon.
Crowds of people came out to John to be baptized by him. You snakes! he said to them. Who told you that you could escape from the punishment God is about to send?
His parents answered, We know that he is our son, and we know that he was born blind.
Jesus saw his mother and the disciple he loved standing there; so he said to his mother, He is your son.
A married woman, for example, is bound by the law to her husband as long as he lives; but if he dies, then she is free from the law that bound her to him.
because I have come down from heaven to do not my own will but the will of him who sent me.
God is not unfair. He will not forget the work you did or the love you showed for him in the help you gave and are still giving to other Christians.
But the teacher of the Law wanted to justify himself, so he asked Jesus, Who is my neighbor?
No one could buy or sell without this mark, that is, the beast's name or the number that stands for the name.
Now come down from the cross and save yourself!
The servant did not have enough to pay his debt, so the king ordered him to be sold as a slave, with his wife and his  children and all that he had, in order to pay the debt.
So they cut off the anchors and let them sink in the sea, and at the same time they untied the ropes that held the steering oars. Then they raised the sail at the front of the ship so that the wind would blow the ship forward, and we headed for shore.
What things? he asked. The things that happened to Jesus of Nazareth, they answered. This man was a prophet and was considered by God and by all the people to be powerful in everything he said and did.
And no one has ever gone up to heaven except the Son of Man, who came down from heaven.
He placed his hands on them and then went away.
and said to them, It is written in the Scriptures that God said, My Temple will be called a house of prayer. But you are making it a hideout for thieves!
Our friends, we want you to know what God's grace has accomplished in the churches in Macedonia.
And again, Isaiah says, A descendant of Jesse will appear; he will come to rule the Gentiles, and they will put their hope in him.
Once more I warn any man who allows himself to be circumcised that he is obliged to obey the whole Law.
Martha said to Jesus, If you had been here, Lord, my brother would not have died!
As it is, however, there still remains for God's people a rest like God's resting on the seventh day.
Greetings to each one of God's people who belong to Christ Jesus. The believers here with me send you their greetings.
Each of you should know how to live with your wife in a holy and honorable way,
The woman was a Gentile, born in the region of Phoenicia in Syria. She begged Jesus to drive the demon out of her daughter.
Someone who is on the roof of a house must not take the time to go down and get any belongings from the house.
The Devil said to him, If you are God's Son, order this stone to turn into bread.
My Father has given me all things. No one knows who the Son is except the Father, and no one knows who the Father is except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.
Some Pharisees came to him and tried to trap him by asking, Does our Law allow a man to divorce his wife for whatever reason he wishes?
The huge dragon was thrown out -- that ancient serpent, named the Devil, or Satan, that deceived the whole world. He was thrown down to earth, and all his angels with him.
When God promised Abraham and his descendants that the world would belong to him, he did so, not because Abraham obeyed the Law, but because he believed and was accepted as righteous by God.
I would like to keep him here with me, while I am in prison for the gospel's sake, so that he could help me in your place.
Then he said to Thomas, Put your finger here, and look at my hands; then reach out your hand and put it in my side. Stop your doubting, and believe!
(:)
Then they sang a hymn and went out to the Mount of Olives. 
But I said, Certainly not, Lord! No ritually unclean or defiled food has ever entered my mouth.
But this is what I have against you: you do not love me now as you did at first.
For some godless people have slipped in unnoticed among us, persons who distort the message about the grace of our God in order to excuse their immoral ways, and who reject Jesus Christ, our only Master and Lord. Long ago the Scriptures predicted the condemnation they have received.
When they returned to the crowd, a man came to Jesus, knelt before him,
But they were opposed by the magician Elymas (that is his name in Greek), who tried to turn the governor away from the faith.
Philip went and told Andrew, and the two of them went and told Jesus.
Again Jesus asked, What shall I compare the Kingdom of God with?
Let us thank God for his priceless gift!
Jesus knew that the Father had given him complete power; he knew that he had come from God and was going to God.
You were like sheep that had lost their way, but now you have been brought back to follow the Shepherd and Keeper of your souls.
If he comes suddenly, he must not find you asleep.
My dear friends, do not believe all who claim to have the Spirit, but test them to find out if the spirit they have comes from God. For many false prophets have gone out everywhere.
It was nine o'clock in the morning when they crucified him.
But they will do all this to you because you are mine; for they do not know the one who sent me.
Who are you, Lord? he asked. I am Jesus, whom you persecute, the voice said.
At one time you yourselves used to live according to such desires, when your life was dominated by them.
I shall come to you after I have gone through Macedonia -- for I have to go through Macedonia.
I don't want to, he answered, but later he changed his mind and went.
At once they screamed, What do you want with us, you Son of God? Have you come to punish us before the right time?
If one part of the body suffers, all the other parts suffer with it; if one part is praised, all the other parts share its happiness.
so that none of you should turn back because of these persecutions. You yourselves know that such persecutions are part of God's will for us.
Stephen answered, Brothers and fathers, listen to me! Before our ancestor Abraham had gone to live in Haran, the God of glory appeared to him in Mesopotamia
The disciples were upset and began to ask him, one after the other, Surely you don't mean me, do you?
if we are being questioned today about the good deed done to the lame man and how he was healed,
The world and everything in it that people desire is passing away; but those who do the will of God live forever.
where there was a man who had a paralyzed hand. Some people were there who wanted to accuse Jesus of doing wrong, so they asked him, Is it against our Law to heal on the Sabbath?
The scripture predicted that God would put the Gentiles right with himself through faith. And so the scripture announced the Good News to Abraham: Through you God will bless all people.
The tenants grabbed his slaves, beat one, killed another, and stoned another.
Festus spent another eight or ten days with them and then went to Caesarea. On the next day he sat down in the judgment court and ordered Paul to be brought in.
We were there when he was given honor and glory by God the Father, when the voice came to him from the Supreme Glory, saying, This is my own dear Son, with whom I am pleased!
A man named Simon lived there, who for some time had astounded the Samaritans with his magic. He claimed that he was someone great,
But a widow who gives herself to pleasure has already died, even though she lives.
because he risked his life and nearly died for the sake of the work of Christ, in order to give me the help that you yourselves could not give.
As for you, my friends, you were called to be free. But do not let this freedom become an excuse for letting your physical desires control you. Instead, let love make you serve one another.
May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
A slave does not belong to a family permanently, but a son belongs there forever.
About that time some prophets went from Jerusalem to Antioch.
Jesus answered, How unbelieving and wrong you people are! How long must I stay with you? How long do I have to put up with you? Bring the boy here to me!
Some people said to Jesus, The disciples of John fast frequently and offer prayers, and the disciples of the Pharisees do the same; but your disciples eat and drink.
God, who made the world and everything in it, is Lord of heaven and earth and does not live in temples made by human hands.
As Jesus was starting on his way again, a man ran up, knelt before him, and asked him, Good Teacher, what must I do to receive eternal life?
the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
You are going to hear the noise of battles close by and the news of battles far away; but do not be troubled. Such things must happen, but they do not mean that the end has come.
Again Jesus said to them, I will go away; you will look for me, but you will die in your sins. You cannot go where I am going.
Jesus said to him, Then see! Your faith has made you well.
At daybreak Jesus left the town and went off to a lonely place. The people started looking for him, and when they found him, they tried to keep him from leaving.
The Holy Spirit inspired David to say: The Lord said to my Lord: Sit here at my right side until I put your enemies under your feet.
The person who speaks in strange tongues, then, must pray for the gift to explain what is said.
The man who had the evil spirit in him attacked them with such violence that he overpowered them all. They ran away from his house, wounded and with their clothes torn off.
Parents, do not irritate your children, or they will become discouraged.
The father at once cried out, I do have faith, but not enough. Help me have more!
You, my child, will be called a prophet of the Most High God. You will go ahead of the Lord to prepare his road for him, 
For our life is a matter of faith, not of sight.
What, then, of those who despise the Son of God? who treat as a cheap thing the blood of God's covenant which purified them from sin? who insult the Spirit of grace? Just think how much worse is the punishment they will deserve!
And the Father, who sent me, also testifies on my behalf. You have never heard his voice or seen his face,
The first covenant had rules for worship and a place made for worship as well.
And now I am happy about my sufferings for you, for by means of my physical sufferings I am helping to complete what still remains of Christ's sufferings on behalf of his body, the church.
Many more believed because of his message,
Life is much more important than food, and the body much more important than clothes.
[Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved; whoever does not believe will be condemned.]
Some of the people there heard him and said, Listen, he is calling for Elijah!
After many days had gone by, the Jews met together and made plans to kill Saul,
Be wise in the way you act toward those who are not believers, making good use of every opportunity you have.
Then the Devil took him up and showed him in a second all the kingdoms of the world.
He looked around at them all; then he said to the man, Stretch out your hand. He did so, and his hand became well again.
When the members of the Council heard this, they were so furious that they wanted to have the apostles put to death.
There is no fear in love; perfect love drives out all fear. So then, love has not been made perfect in anyone who is afraid, because fear has to do with punishment.
The one who reaps the harvest is being paid and gathers the crops for eternal life; so the one who plants and the one who reaps will be glad together.
Do not drink water only, but take a little wine to help your digestion, since you are sick so often.
I assure you that on the Judgment Day God will show more mercy to the people of Sodom and Gomorrah than to the people of that town!
especially those who follow their filthy bodily lusts and despise God's authority. These false teachers are bold and arrogant, and show no respect for the glorious beings above; instead, they insult them.
Would any of you who are fathers give your son a snake when he asks for fish?
All these things are like the first pains of childbirth.
Jesus left the city and went, as he usually did, to the Mount of Olives; and the disciples went with him.
As soon as they spoke, I was about to write. But I heard a voice speak from heaven, Keep secret what the seven thunders have said; do not write it down!
I was afraid, so I went off and hid your money in the ground. Look! Here is what belongs to you.
But we would like to hear your ideas, because we know that everywhere people speak against this party to which you belong.
and keep your faith and a clear conscience. Some people have not listened to their conscience and have made a ruin of their faith.
The hired man runs away because he is only a hired man and does not care about the sheep.
We know that in all things God works for good with those who love him, those whom he has called according to his purpose.
We put a bit into the mouth of a horse to make it obey us, and we are able to make it go where we want.
[Then everyone went home, but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.]
He was made a priest, not by human rules and regulations, but through the power of a life which has no end.
I have a baptism to receive, and how distressed I am until it is over!
After she and the people of her house had been baptized, she invited us, Come and stay in my house if you have decided that I am a true believer in the Lord. And she persuaded us to go.
and the cloth which had been around Jesus' head. It was not lying with the linen cloths but was rolled up by itself.
If the Spirit of God, who raised Jesus from death, lives in you, then he who raised Christ from death will also give life to your mortal bodies by the presence of his Spirit in you.
Turn away from your sins, he said, because the Kingdom of heaven is near!
Five of them were foolish, and the other five were wise.
But how can they call to him for help if they have not believed? And how can they believe if they have not heard the message? And how can they hear if the message is not proclaimed?
Many of the believers came, publicly admitting and revealing what they had done.
Show me the coin for paying the tax! They brought him the coin,
Mary was deeply troubled by the angel's message, and she wondered what his words meant.
Saul went to Jerusalem and tried to join the disciples. But they would not believe that he was a disciple, and they were all afraid of him.
I have not come to call respectable people to repent, but outcasts.
She went running to Simon Peter and the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and told them, They have taken the Lord from the tomb, and we don't know where they have put him!
Every valley must be filled up, every hill and mountain leveled off. The winding roads must be made straight, and the rough paths made smooth.
For this reason I tell you: people can be forgiven any sin and any evil thing they say; but whoever says evil things against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
For it is written in the book of Psalms, May his house become empty; may no one live in it. It is also written, May someone else take his place of service.
As they came near the village to which they were going, Jesus acted as if he were going farther;
These things can be understood as a figure: the two women represent two covenants. The one whose children are born in slavery is Hagar, and she represents the covenant made at Mount Sinai.
Their hair was like women's hair, their teeth were like lions' teeth.
Whoever does not love the Lord -- a curse on him! Marana tha -- Our Lord, come!
Then Jesus took the five loaves and the two fish, looked up to heaven, and gave thanks to God. He broke the loaves and gave them to his disciples to distribute to the people. He also divided the two fish among them all.
Remember those who are in prison, as though you were in prison with them. Remember those who are suffering, as though you were suffering as they are.
When this life became visible, we saw it; so we speak of it and tell you about the eternal life which was with the Father and was made known to us.
And now he can help those who are tempted, because he himself was tempted and suffered.
It is necessary to stop their talk, because they are upsetting whole families by teaching what they should not, and all for the shameful purpose of making money.
Then he asked them, Young men, haven't you caught anything? Not a thing, they answered.
the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,
Then he did not let anyone else go on with him except Peter and James and his brother John.
The chief priests met with the elders and made their plan; they gave a large sum of money to the soldiers
Two women will be grinding meal together: one will be taken away, the other will be left behind.
Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words that give eternal life.
As Jesus stepped ashore, he was met by a man from the town who had demons in him. For a long time this man had gone without clothes and would not stay at home, but spent his time in the burial caves.
The mob was trying to kill Paul, when a report was sent up to the commander of the Roman troops that all of Jerusalem was rioting.
On the way they met a man named Simon, who was coming into the city from the country, and the soldiers forced him to carry Jesus' cross. (Simon was from Cyrene and was the father of Alexander and Rufus.)
Philip ran over and heard him reading from the book of the prophet Isaiah. He asked him, Do you understand what you are reading?
Dear Theophilus: Many people have done their best to write a report of the things that have taken place among us.
Do not be worried and upset, Jesus told them. Believe in God and believe also in me.
Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the sky; and all the peoples of earth will weep as they see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
So he called the servant in. You worthless slave! he said. I forgave you the whole amount you owed me, just because you asked me to.
the son of Enosh, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
But as Paul went on discussing about goodness, self-control, and the coming Day of Judgment, Felix was afraid and said, You may leave now. I will call you again when I get the chance.
For you have been given the privilege of serving Christ, not only by believing in him, but also by suffering for him.
Jesus said this about the Spirit, which those who believed in him were going to receive. At that time the Spirit had not yet been given, because Jesus had not been raised to glory.
You were at one time spiritually dead because of your sins and because you were Gentiles without the Law. But God has now brought you to life with Christ. God forgave us all our sins;
nor do they eat anything that comes from the market unless they wash it first. And they follow many other rules which they have received, such as the proper way to wash cups, pots, copper bowls, and beds.)
How can you be so foolish! You began by God's Spirit; do you now want to finish by your own power?
yet there is for us only one God, the Father, who is the Creator of all things and for whom we live; and there is only one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things were created and through whom we live.
As a result, there is no longer any distinction between Gentiles and Jews, circumcised and uncircumcised, barbarians, savages, slaves, and free, but Christ is all, Christ is in all.
The secret is that by means of the gospel the Gentiles have a part with the Jews in God's blessings; they are members of the same body and share in the promise that God made through Christ Jesus.
Forgive us the wrongs we have done, as we forgive the wrongs that others have done to us.
Some Pharisees and Sadducees who came to Jesus wanted to trap him, so they asked him to perform a miracle for them, to show that God approved of him.
So they told them to leave the Council room, and then they started discussing among themselves.
No one can break into a strong man's house and take away his belongings unless he first ties up the strong man; then he can plunder his house.
Aren't five sparrows sold for two pennies? Yet not one sparrow is forgotten by God.
I have no right to boast just because I preach the gospel. After all, I am under orders to do so. And how terrible it would be for me if I did not preach the gospel!
This was the real light -- the light that comes into the world and shines on all people.
Many of the people scolded him and told him to be quiet. But he shouted even more loudly, Son of David, have mercy on me!
John wore clothes made of camel's hair, with a leather belt around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey.
Do you suppose that I came to bring peace to the world? No, not peace, but division.
Before God, who gives life to all things, and before Christ Jesus, who firmly professed his faith before Pontius Pilate, I command you
Jesus said to them, You don't know what you are asking for. Can you drink the cup of suffering that I must drink? Can you be baptized in the way I must be baptized?
Was there any prophet that your ancestors did not persecute? They killed God's messengers, who long ago announced the coming of his righteous Servant. And now you have betrayed and murdered him.
If someone brings a lawsuit against you and takes you to court, do your best to settle the dispute before you get to court. If you don't, you will be dragged before the judge, who will hand you over to the police, and you will be put in jail.
I am so sure of you; I take such pride in you! In all our troubles I am still full of courage; I am running over with joy.
for then he would have had to suffer many times ever since the creation of the world. Instead, now when all ages of time are nearing the end, he has appeared once and for all, to remove sin through the sacrifice of himself.
Then Jesus began to teach his disciples: The Son of Man must suffer much and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the teachers of the Law. He will be put to death, but three days later he will rise to life.
When he finished speaking, he said to Simon, Push the boat out further to the deep water, and you and your partners let down your nets for a catch.
(:)
Woman, why are you crying? they asked her. She answered, They have taken my Lord away, and I do not know where they have put him!
In the same way, I tell you, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine respectable people who do not need to repent.
If I thank God for my food, why should anyone criticize me about food for which I give thanks?
and so did some women who had been healed of evil spirits and diseases: Mary (who was called Magdalene), from whom seven demons had been driven out;
The chief priests and the teachers of the Law were afraid of the people, and so they were trying to find a way of putting Jesus to death secretly.
Imitate me, then, just as I imitate Christ.
For God will reward each of us according to what we have done.
There was a garden in the place where Jesus had been put to death, and in it there was a new tomb where no one had ever been buried.
And John gave this testimony: I saw the Spirit come down like a dove from heaven and stay on him.
My sheep listen to my voice; I know them, and they follow me.
He said he would show mercy to our ancestors and remember his sacred covenant.
and when they came to Jesus, they saw the man who used to have the mob of demons in him. He was sitting there, clothed and in his right mind; and they were all afraid. 
And I am not saying this because I feel neglected, for I have learned to be satisfied with what I have.
(Oh yes, I also baptized Stephanas and his family; but I can't remember whether I baptized anyone else.)
Blind Pharisee! Clean what is inside the cup first, and then the outside will be clean too!
Now, as for those enemies of mine who did not want me to be their king, bring them here and kill them in my presence!
Those who fear him and do what is right are acceptable to him, no matter what race they belong to.
If we are not faithful, he remains faithful, because he cannot be false to himself.
But a married man concerns himself with worldly matters, because he wants to please his wife;
Such a person must understand that there is no difference between what we write in our letters when we are away and what we will do when we are there with you.
And so the word of God continued to spread. The number of disciples in Jerusalem grew larger and larger, and a great number of priests accepted the faith.
I planted the seed, Apollos watered the plant, but it was God who made the plant grow.
Do the Jews then have any advantage over the Gentiles? Or is there any value in being circumcised?
When they arrived in Jerusalem, Jesus went to the Temple and began to drive out all those who were buying and selling. He overturned the tables of the moneychangers and the stools of those who sold pigeons,
Give us day by day the food we need.
Why is it that your disciples disobey the teaching handed down by our ancestors? They don't wash their hands in the proper way before they eat!
Then the end will come; Christ will overcome all spiritual rulers, authorities, and powers, and will hand over the Kingdom to God the Father.
For Christ has brought the Law to an end, so that everyone who believes is put right with God.
The greatness and the wealth of the nations will be brought into the city.
Or perhaps you despise his great kindness, tolerance, and patience. Surely you know that God is kind, because he is trying to lead you to repent.
The Law of Moses appoints men who are imperfect to be high priests; but God's promise made with the vow, which came later than the Law, appoints the Son, who has been made perfect forever.
After all, who is Apollos? And who is Paul? We are simply God's servants, by whom you were led to believe. Each one of us does the work which the Lord gave him to do:
But by God's grace I am what I am, and the grace that he gave me was not without effect. On the contrary, I have worked harder than any of the other apostles, although it was not really my own doing, but God's grace working with me.
Who, then, is a faithful and wise servant? It is the one that his master has placed in charge of the other servants to give them their food at the proper time.
From Paul, a servant of Christ Jesus and an apostle chosen and called by God to preach his Good News.
When the disciples crossed over to the other side of the lake, they forgot to take any bread.
When the Son of Man came, he ate and drank, and everyone said, Look at this man! He is a glutton and wine drinker, a friend of tax collectors and other outcasts! God's wisdom, however, is shown to be true by its results.
After John's messengers had left, Jesus began to speak about him to the  crowds: When you went out to John in the desert, what did you expect to see? A blade of grass bending in the wind?
Do not think that I have come to do away with the Law of Moses and the teachings of the prophets. I have not come to do away with them, but to make their teachings come true.
Jesus went all over Galilee, teaching in the synagogues, preaching the Good News about the Kingdom, and healing people who had all kinds of disease and sickness.
Sin found its chance, and by means of the commandment it deceived me and killed me.
Do not be afraid, city of Zion! Here comes your king, riding on a young donkey.
They will suffer the punishment of eternal destruction, separated from the presence of the Lord and from his glorious might,
What I say is this: let the Spirit direct your lives, and you will not satisfy the desires of the human nature.
Demas fell in love with this present world and has deserted me, going off to Thessalonica. Crescens went to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia.
When we were safely ashore, we learned that the island was called Malta.
because God is always at work in you to make you willing and able to obey his own purpose.
You are right, Jesus replied; do this and you will live.
For what credit is there if you endure the beatings you deserve for having done wrong? But if you endure suffering even when you have done right, God will bless you for it.
When Jesus came to that place, he looked up and said to Zacchaeus, Hurry down, Zacchaeus, because I must stay in your house today.
No one can deny how great is the secret of our religion: He appeared in human form, was shown to be right by the Spirit, and was seen by angels. He was preached among the nations, was believed in throughout the world, and was taken up to heaven.
because now we really live if you stand firm in your life in union with the Lord.
Then he said to the man with the paralyzed hand, Stretch out your hand. He stretched it out, and it became well again, just like the other one.
When the governor saw what had happened, he believed; for he was greatly amazed at the teaching about the Lord.
We do not live for ourselves only, and we do not die for ourselves only.
So we are sending our brother with them; we have tested him many times and found him always very eager to help. And now that he has so much confidence in you, he is all the more eager to help.
Then Jesus went into the Temple and began to drive out the merchants,
For the people who live in Jerusalem and their leaders did not know that he is the Savior, nor did they understand the words of the prophets that are read every Sabbath. Yet they made the prophets' words come true by condemning Jesus.
I, Paul, make a personal appeal to you -- I who am said to be meek and mild when I am with you, but harsh with you when I am away. By the gentleness and kindness of Christ
The official asked Philip, Tell me, of whom is the prophet saying this? Of himself or of someone else?
Pray to the owner of the harvest that he will send out workers to gather in his harvest.
As the scripture says, For your sake we are in danger of death at all times; we are treated like sheep that are going to be slaughtered.
But he said to me, Don't do it! I am a servant together with you and with your brothers the prophets and of all those who obey the words in this book. Worship God!
and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the first to be raised from death and who is also the ruler of the kings of the world. He loves us, and by his sacrificial death he has freed us from our sins
Peter answered, Lord, I am ready to go to prison with you and to die with you!
When I come, then, I will bring up everything he has done: the terrible things he says about us and the lies he tells! But that is not enough for him; he will not receive the Christians when they come, and even stops those who want to receive them and tries to drive them out of the church!
You bad and lazy servant! his master said. You knew, did you, that I reap  harvests where I did not plant, and gather crops where I did not scatter seed?
Then they crucified him and divided his clothes among themselves, throwing dice to see who would get which piece of clothing.
As thousands of people crowded together, so that they were stepping on each other, Jesus said first to his disciples, Be on guard against the yeast of the Pharisees -- I mean their hypocrisy.
So then, my dear friends, keep away from the worship of idols.
He will be handed over to the Gentiles, who will make fun of him, insult him, and spit on him.
Their answer was, We would not have brought him to you if he had not committed a crime.
For God has made all people prisoners of disobedience, so that he might show mercy to them all.
And so all the rest of the human race will come to me, all the Gentiles whom I have called to be my own.
Keep watch and pray that you will not fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
Every high priest is appointed to present offerings and animal sacrifices to God, and so our High Priest must also have something to offer.
But as the scripture says, Whoever wants to boast must boast about what the Lord has done.
Just say Yes' or No' -- anything else you say comes from the Evil One.
Teacher, they said, Moses said that if a man who has no children dies, his brother must marry the widow so that they can have children who will be considered the dead man's children.
God was performing unusual miracles through Paul.
and keep yourselves in the love of God, as you wait for our Lord Jesus Christ in his mercy to give you eternal life.
On the Judgment Day the people of Nineveh will stand up and accuse you, because they turned from their sins when they heard Jonah preach; and I assure you that there is something here greater than Jonah!
The people listened to Paul until he said this; but then they started shouting at the top of their voices, Away with him! Kill him! He's not fit to live!
But a few of you there in Sardis have kept your clothes clean. You will walk with me, clothed in white, because you are worthy to do so.
Then the disciples understood that he was not warning them to guard themselves from the yeast used in bread but from the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
- My host Gaius, in whose house the church meets, sends you his greetings; Erastus, the city treasurer, and our brother Quartus send you their greetings.
There he now waits until God puts his enemies as a footstool under his feet.
They stripped off his clothes and put a scarlet robe on him.
Other people are selfish and reject what is right, in order to follow what is wrong; on them God will pour out his anger and fury.
His answer made his enemies ashamed of themselves, while the people rejoiced over all the wonderful things that he did.
I was told the number of the mounted troops: it was two hundred million.
Some of his disciples asked among themselves, What does this mean? He tells us that in a little while we will not see him, and then a little while later we will see him; and he also says, It is because I am going to the Father.
Who are you, then? they asked. Are you Elijah? No, I am not, John answered. Are you the Prophet? they asked. No, he replied.
Your conduct among the heathen should be so good that when they accuse you of being evildoers, they will have to recognize your good deeds and so praise God on the Day of his coming.
They went into the house, and when they saw the child with his mother Mary, they knelt down and worshiped him. They brought out their gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh, and presented them to him.
Another servant came and said, Sir, here is your gold coin; I kept it hidden in a handkerchief.
But Jesus heard it and said to Jairus, Don't be afraid; only believe, and she will be well.
Others said, He is the Messiah! But others said, The Messiah will not come from Galilee!
As Paul defended himself in this way, Festus shouted at him, You are mad, Paul! Your great learning is driving you mad!
So, in all our trouble and suffering we have been encouraged about you, friends. It was your faith that encouraged us,
In the same way the servant who had received two thousand coins earned another two thousand.
For our gifts of knowledge and of inspired messages are only partial;
Jesus saw her weeping, and he saw how the people with her were weeping also; his heart was touched, and he was deeply moved.
The men who were traveling with Saul had stopped, not saying a word; they heard the voice but could not see anyone.
We send you, then, Judas and Silas, who will tell you in person the same things we are writing.
As for you, how fortunate you are! Your eyes see and your ears hear.
As soon as Peter and John were set free, they returned to their group and told them what the chief priests and the elders had said.
Now, however, we are free from the Law, because we died to that which once held us prisoners. No longer do we serve in the old way of a written law, but in the new way of the Spirit.
It was more than we could have hoped for! First they gave themselves to the Lord; and then, by God's will they gave themselves to us as well.
But they were not able to answer him about this.
We have this hope as an anchor for our lives. It is safe and sure, and goes through the curtain of the heavenly temple into the inner sanctuary.
So he said to his disciples, The harvest is large, but there are few workers to gather it in.
the women should keep quiet in the meetings. They are not allowed to speak; as the Jewish Law says, they must not be in charge.
After this, Jesus and his mother, brothers, and disciples went to Capernaum and stayed there a few days.
Some of the things we hear you say sound strange to us, and we would like to know what they mean.
And if you do good only to those who do good to you, why should you receive a blessing? Even sinners do that!
Which one of you can prove that I am guilty of sin? If I tell the truth, then why do you not believe me?
For each of you have to carry your own load.
But he will say again, I don't know where you come from. Get away from me, all you wicked people!
We wanted to return to you. I myself tried to go back more than once, but Satan would not let us.
and those who live and believe in me will never die. Do you believe this?
The command that Christ has given us is this: whoever loves God must love others also.
You are no more intelligent than the others, Jesus said to them. Don't you understand? Nothing that goes into you from the outside can really make you unclean,
When he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to shout, Jesus! Son of David! Have mercy on me!
And you, too, will speak about me, because you have been with me from the very beginning.
